                                                  Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



Global
Infrastructure
Resilience 2025
Capturing the Resilience Dividend


A Biennial Report from the
Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure
This Work is a product of the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI) as part of the second Global
Infrastructure Resilience report (GIR 2025) and features external contributions from multiple organizations. The full
report and the executive summary may be accessed at https://cdri.world/resilience-dividend/global-infrastructure-
resilience-report-second-edition/. All working papers for this report (GIR 2025 Working Paper Series) are available
on the official website of CDRI, accessible on the web link mentioned above. They provide detailed background
material, methodologies, analyses, and case studies for each chapter of the report. The papers will be released
sequentially starting November 2025 through 2026.


An online data platform enabling visualization, analyses, and downloading provisions for the results of the Global
Infrastructure Risk Model and Resilience Index (GIRI) is available at https://cdri.world/giri. Updates incorporating
the GIR 2025 results will be available on this platform in early 2026.



Disclaimer                                 Rights and Permissions                  responsibility of the author or
The findings, analyses,                                                            authors of the adaptation and are
interpretations, and conclusions                                                   not endorsed by CDRI.”
expressed in this Work by
partners/contributors do not               This work is available under            Third-party content: CDRI
necessarily reflect the views of           the Creative Commons                    does not necessarily own each
CDRI, its executive committee,             Attribution 4.0 International           component of the content
or the Members of the Coalition.           Licence (CC BY-NC 4.0) (https://        contained within the Work. CDRI
The boundaries and names shown             creativecommons.org/licenses/           therefore does not warrant that
on the maps and graphs and the             by-nc/4.0/). Under this Creative        the use of any third party-owned
designations used in this report           Commons Attribution licence, you        individual component or part
do not imply official endorsement          are free to copy, remix, transform,     contained in the Work will not
or acceptance by the CDRI. The             redistribute the material or            infringe on the rights of those
designations employed and                  adapt the material, only for non-       third parties. The risk of claims
the presentation of material on            commercial purposes under the           resulting from such infringement
the maps herein do not imply               following licence conditions:           rests solely with you. If you wish
the expression of any opinion                                                      to re-use a component of the
whatsoever on the part of the              Attribution: Every time the ‘Work’      Work, it is your responsibility to
Secretariat of the United Nations          is either distributed, transmitted,     determine whether permission
concerning the legal status of any         adapted, or in any other manner         is needed for that reuse and,
country, territory, city, or area, or      used, the same has to be cited          consequently, obtain permission
of its authorities, or concerning          as follows: “CDRI (2025). Global        from the copyright owner.
the delimitation of its frontiers or       Infrastructure Resilience 2025          Examples of components can
boundaries. Nothing herein shall           Report. Coalition for Disaster          include, but are not limited to,
constitute or be considered a              Resilient Infrastructure, New           tables, figures, or images.
limitation upon or waiver of any           Delhi.”
legal, proprietary rights, privileges,                                             Any adaptation, distribution,
and immunities of CDRI, all of             Translations: If a translation of       publication, transmission, or any
which are specifically reserved.           this work is created, the following     other use of the Work through
                                           disclaimer must be added in             this license by you shall not
ISBN: 978-81-965011-1-2                    addition to the attribution: “This      violate any law in force in the
                                           translation was not created             territory of use.
                                           by CDRI and should not be
                                           considered an official CDRI             All queries should be addressed
                                           translation. CDRI shall not be          to: Global Infrastructure Resilience
                                           liable for any content or error in      (GIR) report team, CDRI
                                           this translation.”                      Secretariat, Coalition for Disaster
Cover                                                                              Resilient Infrastructure, India
The cover image shows annual test          Adaptations: If you adapt the           e-mail: biennialreport@cdri.world
of the Ramspol inflatable rubber           Work, the following disclaimer
surge barrier near the village of Ens in
Kampen, The Netherlands. It can be         must be added along with the
inflated during storms, stopping water     attribution: “This is an adaptation
from the Ketlemeer from going into
                                           of an original Work by CDRI.
the Zwarte Meer between Flevoland
and Overijssel. It captures innovation     Views and opinions expressed
and resilience in infrastructure.          in the adaptation are the sole
Source: Getty Images
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


Global Infrastructure Resilience 2025
Capturing the Resilience Dividend




A Biennial Report from the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure
Testimonials


Suman Bery               As escalating risks and the increasing intensity of disasters redefine global
Vice Chairman, NITI      development, the need for collective action to forge stable and scalable
Aayog, Government of     pathways to sustainable growth has become more indispensable than ever.
India                    CDRI’s second Global Infrastructure Resilience report (GIR 2025) arrives at
                         a crucial moment, offering practical insights and thoughtful guidance for
                         countries striving for growth that is both resilient and equitable.

                         Providing compelling evidence on the magnitude of indirect economic losses
                         from infrastructure disruptions, it underscores that faster, comprehensive,
                         and well-financed reconstruction, supported by strong institutional readiness,
                         is key to shaping a world that learns to thrive through resilience. Ensuring
                         dedicated budgets for maintenance, transparent rules for resilience financing,
                         and targeted retrofitting of vulnerable assets is equally critical. Infrastructure
                         agencies must be empowered with clear mandates, adequate contingency
                         funds, and appropriate financial instruments to enable swift and complete
                         reconstruction after disasters. Furthermore, by advancing nuanced risk
                         assessment and leveraging technological innovation and novel approaches to
                         scale resilience, the report outlines pathways for tangible outcomes that can
                         drive sustained and collective progress.

                         Building resilience is a shared responsibility, globally and within countries.
                         It calls for coherence between science, policy, finance, and implementation,
                         and for deeper global cooperation and partnerships. This report provides
                         both the evidence and the vision needed to make resilience a cornerstone of
                         sustainable development and collective progress.



Rosa Galvez              Building on the foundation of its inaugural edition, the second Global
Senator, Independent     Infrastructure Resilience report (GIR 2025) reaffirms that resilience is not an
Senators Group, Senate   afterthought but is central to the global adaptation agenda. By placing resilient
of Canada                infrastructure at the heart of this collective ambition, the report envisions a
                         future that is equitable, inclusive, and grounded in protecting those most at
                         risk. Its renewed focus on coordinated and forward-looking policies, innovative
                         engineering and technological solutions, and clear standards and regulations
                         that embed resilience across all stages of planning and implementation, sets
                         a clear direction towards stronger and more adaptive systems.

                         Equally important are the often-overlooked investments in maintenance,
                         retrofitting, data systems, and capacity building, which quietly but powerfully
                         reinforce the infrastructure that sustains communities and economies. These
                         are reminders that infrastructure resilience must follow a collaborative and
                         systemic approach, evolving with foresight and guided by the principles of
                         inclusion and justice, to ensure that knowledge translates into meaningful
                         action.

                         CDRI’s leadership through this report exemplifies the power of shared
                         purpose and vision. I strongly commend this effort, which stands as a
                         powerful testament to how policy, innovation, and collective resolve can drive
                         transformative change and secure a resilient and sustainable future for all.




                                                 4
                                            Testimonials
Kamal Kishore               Resilient infrastructure not only saves lives and livelihoods, but it is the
Special Representative      backbone of sustainable development. As countries face larger and more
of the United Nations       expensive disasters, it is critical that all infrastructure investment decisions be
Secretary-General           guided by an understanding of current and future disaster risks. The second
(SRSG) for Disaster Risk    Global Infrastructure Resilience report (GIR 2025) is a valuable contribution to
Reduction, and Head
                            ensuring that all infrastructure is built to last.
of the United Nations
Office for Disaster Risk
Reduction (UNDRR)



Rachel Kyte                 Infrastructure sits at the intersection of climate ambition, economic stability,
UK Special                  and our overall well-being. It determines whether communities can withstand
Representative for          disruption, recover with dignity, and continue to thrive amid rising climate and
Climate, and Professor      disaster adversities. CDRI’s second Global Infrastructure Resilience report
of Practice in Climate      (GIR 2025) deepens this understanding by demonstrating how resilience can
Policy, Blavatnik School
                            be built into infrastructure systems, policies, and finance—not as a secondary
of Government, University
of Oxford
                            consideration but as a central pillar of development strategy.

                            The report advances the global dialogue on how governments and financial
                            institutions can embed resilience within fiscal and investment frameworks.
                            It sets out a layered approach that integrates public finance, concessional
                            resources, private capital, and coherent planning and policy to strengthen
                            systemic preparedness. In doing so, it reinforces the priorities of the COP30
                            Presidency—to close the adaptation finance gap, foster stronger multilateral
                            cooperation, and ensure that climate finance reaches the most vulnerable
                            communities without adding fiscal strain. Equally, its focus on enhancing
                            the resilience of renewable energy systems is critical to sustaining net-zero
                            transitions and ensuring reliable, equitable access to essential services.

                            At a time when resilience is emerging as the nucleus of the global adaptation
                            agenda, GIR 2025 report distinguishes itself by turning complex deliberations
                            into clear, actionable insights. It reinforces that resilient infrastructure is not
                            only about withstanding shocks but about enabling progress, equity, and
                            stability in a world committed to sustainable growth.



Meike Van                   Rainfall has changed. Temperatures are rising. We need to adapt now. CDRI’s
Ginneken                    GIR 2025 report provides data, analysis, and solutions. It shows the urgency
Water Envoy, Government
                            of proactive prevention, resilient new infrastructure, and asset management.
of the Netherlands          I recommend the GIR 2025 to help prioritize adaptation investments because
                            we need to get the biggest bang for every buck of climate finance.




                                                     5
                                                Testimonials
Maria Netto                 The GIR 2025 report plays a crucial role in advancing the next generation
Executive Director,         of finance innovation—one that connects rigorous assessment, investment
Instituto Clima e           strategy, and policy vision. By providing data-driven insights and a framework
Sociedade, Brazil           for evaluating resilience, it helps governments, investors, and development
                            institutions understand where and how capital can most effectively support
                            adaptive infrastructure.

                            Financing resilience requires a new generation of innovation—one that
                            integrates rigorous risk assessment, financial instruments, and long-term
                            planning to align investment flows with adaptation needs. By linking data,
                            technology, and governance, we can transform infrastructure from a source of
                            vulnerability into a driver of stability and opportunity. The resilience dividend is
                            not abstract—it is the economic, social, and environmental return that comes
                            from embedding adaptation at the core of development finance.



Stephane                    In just a few years, CDRI has firmly established its position as an essential
Hallegatte                  actor in economic resilience and infrastructure development, helping
Chief Climate Economist,
                            government, international organizations, and private actors better understand
The World Bank              and quantify the value of more resilient infrastructure. They have done it
                            with robust analytics for risk-informed investments, strong collaborations,
                            and innovative initiatives, and this new report is an important and actionable
                            addition to global knowledge on the opportunities from resilient infrastructure.



Eduardo A.                  The GIR 2025 report marks a vital shift from risk management to reliability,
Cavallo                     placing resilience and equity at the heart of global infrastructure strategies.
Principal Economic
                            By emphasizing actionable recommendations and innovative financing,
Advisor of the              this report addresses the sector’s most urgent priorities—ensuring that
Infrastructure and Energy   infrastructure systems can withstand shocks, adapt to changing conditions,
Sector, Inter-American      and continue delivering essential services for all.
Development Bank
                            GIR 2025 recognizes that resilience is not only about minimizing losses but
                            also about unlocking long-term economic, social, and environmental benefits.
                            Its focus on practical solutions, inclusive approaches, and new financial
                            instruments will help guide policymakers and practitioners as they work to
                            close investment gaps and build a more sustainable future.

                            This work is an important contribution to the global agenda, helping move us
                            decisively from risk to reliability and inspiring collaboration across regions
                            and sectors.



Alexandra                   The second edition of the landmark Global Infrastructure Resilience Report
Galperin                    demonstrates convincingly that both the failing and delayed recovery
Former Unit Head,
                            of critical infrastructure sets back economies significantly, and that
Disaster Risk               these costs - especially those related to the loss of function and service
Management, ADB             continuity - are both socially and economically unsustainable. As such, it
                            is required reading for development policymakers, financing institutions,
                            and operators of infrastructure, and provides a holistic framework to avert
                            or reduce losses by investing in smart strategies to absorb, respond to,
                            and recover from disasters.




                                                     6
                                                Testimonials
Foreword




Governments across the world invest heavily in infrastructure. The provision of
infrastructure remains one of the most visible and essential indicators of development. Be
it roads, energy, telecom, or water supply, countries are keen to augment their infrastructure
assets and improve the quality of life for their citizens. As these assets and services are
being planned and expanded, resilience has become an indispensable consideration in
every stage of infrastructure design, construction, and operation.

This imperative further calls for systematic investments in risk reduction, risk transfer,
and risk management. The mounting losses experienced across the infrastructure
sector underscore the cost of inaction. Disasters—whether floods, storms, heatwaves,
or earthquakes—can wipe out decades of progress. Building resilience in infrastructure
systems helps nations reduce these losses, protect their development gains, and strengthen
long-term fiscal stability.

The Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI) was established with the mandate
to promote the resilience of infrastructure systems globally. It unites governments,
international organizations, financial institutions, the private sector, and research entities
to foster a shared understanding of risks and advance practical solutions for resilient
infrastructure. Through technical cooperation, capacity building, and the generation of
evidence and tools, CDRI advocates for infrastructure systems that can withstand, adapt to,
and recover from disasters and climate change.




                                               7
                                            Foreword
CDRI’s Global Infrastructure Resilience (GIR 2023) report marked the beginning of this
advocacy. It presented the first comprehensive analysis of global infrastructure risk through
the Global Infrastructure Risk Model and Resilience Index (GIRI), quantifying how much
countries stand to lose—and gain—by investing in resilience. The report introduced the
concept of the ‘resilience dividend’, showing that resilience is not only about avoided losses
but also about broader co-benefits, such as improved service continuity, productivity, and
social well-being.

The GIR 2025 report builds on this foundation. It moves the global dialogue from simply
understanding risks towards actively managing and reducing them through concrete
actions. While the GIRI model remains a powerful analytical tool, the next step is to develop
clear, practical methodologies for risk assessment at the national and subnational levels.

Risk modelling and assessment are indispensable for identifying vulnerabilities and
prioritizing investments. Yet, they must not remain solely analytical exercises. The findings
must be followed by cost-effective and implementable solutions, ranging from improved
design standards and asset maintenance to resilient reconstruction and risk-informed
planning. National databases on infrastructure losses and damages should be strengthened
to improve decision-making and enable more precise quantification of risk.

This report broadens the scope of risk assessment by including emerging hazards, such as
heatwaves and cold waves, and infrastructure related to irrigation, which are increasingly
relevant in a changing climate. However, the focus remains on translating data and analytics
into practical guidance for infrastructure agencies and ministries of finance, planning, and
disaster management—aiming to help them embed resilience within national frameworks.

Resilience begins with governance. Weak enforcement of codes, outdated standards, and
fragmented responsibilities often compound infrastructure risks. Strengthening regulatory
compliance and institutional capacity must, therefore, be at the core of national resilience
strategies.

The report highlights that countries with effective governance structures, trained
professionals, and coordinated institutions recover faster and sustain growth longer after
disasters. It also underscores the importance of embedding resilience across the entire
infrastructure life cycle—from planning and procurement to maintenance and reconstruction—
and fostering a culture of compliance supported by both public and private sectors.

A critical question before governments is how to finance resilient infrastructure. The GIR
2025 report offers a pragmatic way forward through a layered approach to financing. This
involves a combination of budgetary allocations for resilience, contingency funds, credit
lines, insurance, and access to international risk pools. No single instrument can address
all risks—together, these tools can provide comprehensive protection against fiscal shocks.
Within the financial world, innovations in insurance and risk financing are transforming how
countries manage disaster-related fiscal risks. International risk pooling mechanisms are
emerging as effective means to spread risk and enhance insurance coverage for critical
assets. These instruments, complemented by sovereign risk financing and public–private
partnerships, can provide faster access to recovery funds and ensure that reconstruction is
not only rapid but also resilient.




                                              8
                                           Foreword
Governments should prioritize the development of national financial protection strategies
that allocate resources across the full disaster cycle—mitigation, preparedness, response,
and recovery—and strengthen subnational access to resilience financing.

The GIR 2025 report advances the agenda for resilient infrastructure by combining robust
risk analytics, governance reforms, and innovative financing. It provides a roadmap for
countries to enhance their institutional capacities and align infrastructure development with
long-term resilience goals.

Resilience is no longer an optional consideration—it is a strategic and economic imperative.
Countries that invest in resilience not only safeguard their citizens and economies but also
create the conditions for sustained, inclusive, and climate-resilient growth. This report calls
upon policymakers, planners, financial institutions, and private investors to act collectively
and systematically to embed resilience in every stage of infrastructure development.

I would like to commend the authors of this report for their exemplary work in distilling
insights from a wide range of global and national research and in presenting them in a clear,
coherent, and actionable manner. The report admirably integrates all stages of the risk
management cycle—from risk identification and reduction to preparedness, response, and
recovery—and offers a comprehensive framework for resilience building. It is a significant
contribution to global knowledge and will serve as a valuable guide for infrastructure
planners, policymakers, and financial institutions alike.

Krishna Vatsa
Member, National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA)
and India Co-chair, Executive Committee, CDRI




                                               9
                                            Foreword
Preface




This year, 2025, saw several disastrous events—including Cyclone Remal in South Asia,
floods in Bolivia, an earthquake in Myanmar, and Hurricane Melissa in the Caribbean—which
devastated communities, damaged infrastructure, and affected lives and livelihoods. As
per the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction’s (UNDRR) Global Assessment
Report 2025, global disaster costs now exceed $2.3 trillion. Two years ago, the Coalition for
Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI) launched the Global Infrastructure Resilience Report
2023, estimating that global average annual losses related to buildings and infrastructure
due to multiple geophysical and hydrometeorological hazards exceed $700 billion, or
approximately 14 percent of the annual global GDP growth. Climate change is expected
to intensify these losses. Disasters have an even greater impact in countries where the
infrastructure asset base is low, such as Small Island Developing States or regions such as
Africa, where much infrastructure remains to be built. In these places, the loss of a crucial
bridge or a hospital can debilitate a community if services are disrupted for long durations.

Infrastructure underpins the development aspirations of nations and is essential to meeting
Sustainable Development Goals. With significant infrastructure yet to be built across
most of the developing world, and efforts ongoing to retrofit existing infrastructure to
address newer challenges in the developed world, a focus on resilient infrastructure can
yield significant economic and social benefits. CDRI’s research shows that damage and
disruption to infrastructure from an event such as a cyclone, flood, heatwave, landslide, or
earthquake have a multiplier loss effect on the economy—sometimes as much as ten times
the cost of damage. Furthermore, communities that bounce back faster after a disastrous




                                              10
                                            Preface
event face reduced economic losses compared with those where devastation lingers for a
longer period.

In this context, resilience is an opportunity to integrate a preparedness lens in infrastructure
decisions such that damages are reduced, service disruptions minimized, recovery
hastened, and communities are able to withstand and recover from disasters. But how
do we do this? In its second Global Infrastructure Resilience Report 2025, CDRI examines
this question through four key dimensions that are important to increase the resilience of
infrastructure systems: technology, finance, institutions and governance, and nature-based
solutions. Furthermore, the report features close to 75 case studies to help illustrate what
communities are already working towards so that others can learn and adapt.

Resilient infrastructure should be everyone’s agenda—infrastructure ministries, finance
agencies, disaster management authorities, research institutions, multilateral partners, and
the private sector. Each brings a unique perspective and, in collaboration with others, can
ensure that disasters do not wipe out generations of progress because infrastructure failed
to perform when the community needed it the most.

Amit Prothi
Director General, CDRI




                                               11
                                             Preface
Aerial view of India’s Longest Sea Bridge
Mumbai Trans Harbour Sea Link
Source: Shutterstock




                                                   12
                                            Executive Summary
                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




                    Key Messages




       13
Executive Summary
                                                         Buildings in Kathmandu, Nepal Source: Floris Boogaard

I                          1. Risk assessments are invaluable tools to prioritize resilient
    Assessing                 investments, including maintenance, retrofitting, constructing
    infrastructure risks      cost-effective and resilient new assets, and rebuilding damaged
    and measuring             assets more efficiently after a disaster.
    the benefits of
                           2. Localized infrastructure risk assessments at national and
    resilience are            subnational levels are needed to inform resilience investment
    key to resilient          decisions. National-level risk assessments can help
    infrastructure            governments obtain an aggregated overview of risks across
    planning.                 various infrastructure sectors, thereby informing national
                              policies more effectively. However, translating policies into
                              action requires a more granular analysis.

                           3. CDRI’s Global Infrastructure Risk Model and Resilience Index
                              (GIRI), developed to conduct infrastructure risk assessments, is
                              not only global—it can also be applied at regional, national, and
                              subnational levels, leveraging better data and local knowledge.
                              The standardized financial risk metrics generated by GIRI
                              represent a common language for identifying, understanding,
                              visualizing, and estimating physical risk to infrastructure.

                           4. Infrastructure agencies, regulators, ministries of planning and
                              finance, and infrastructure asset operators should mainstream
                              the use of risk assessment and cost-benefit analysis tools
                              to make new infrastructure investment decisions. The
                              quantification of direct and indirect resilience benefits is
                              indispensable for allocating limited funds to maintenance and
                              retrofitting; building new, stronger assets; and rapidly and fully
                              reconstructing after disasters.



                                               14
                                          Key Messages
II                          5. CDRI’s economic impact modelling in eight diverse countries
      Recovery-                shows that the economic costs associated with infrastructure
      readiness                failures due to disasters are, on average, 7.4 times the cost of
      and faster               direct damage to infrastructure assets. When roads and ports
      reconstruction           fail, products do not reach the market. If electricity and water
      reduce the               services are interrupted, businesses and households suffer.
      economic impacts      6. Faster and comprehensive reconstruction after disasters
      of disasters.            significantly reduces economic losses. If a country is able to
                               execute a full reconstruction over 10 years—instead of the
                               usual long, partial reconstruction processes—the average gross
                               domestic product (GDP) impact in 2050 may decline by more
                               than half, from 7.4 percent to 3 percent. Faster reconstruction
                               reduces the economic impacts even further. Financial and
                               institutional readiness for fast reconstruction is key.




III                         7. According to CDRI’s global survey of more than 500 businesses,
      Businesses that          over three-quarters of respondents believe that clearer policies
      build end-to-            and stronger enforcement of resilient infrastructure are
      end resilience           necessary to protect companies from the impacts of disasters.
      capabilities can         The ability to withstand and recover from disasters depends
      better absorb,           not only on the businesses’ internal continuity planning and
      respond to, and          response but also on the timely recovery of the infrastructure
                               services they rely on.
      recover from
      disasters, and have   8. The vulnerability of businesses is determined not only by
      shorter downtime         the hazards faced by a company’s own sites but also by the
      and faster market-       resilience of suppliers, logistics, and customers. For many
      share recovery.          industries, value-chain risks—such as disrupted inputs and
                               blocked logistics nodes—may be more important than direct
                               damage to their facilities. According to the survey, 85 percent
                               of large firms do not consider supplier resilience during vendor
                               selection.

                            9. To build their resilience, businesses need to test their business
                               continuity plans and support them with detailed standard
                               operating procedures, agreements with reliable vendors and
                               suppliers, and insurance packages to protect their assets and
                               revenues. While insurance penetration is high among large
                               businesses, more than 40 percent recognize they do not have
                               sufficient coverage for disasters.




                                               15
                                           Key Messages
IV                          10. New technologies hold immense promise for transforming the
     New technologies           resilience of infrastructure systems. They can help improve the
     are radically              data value chain, communication, and the robustness of the
     changing the way           infrastructure system.
     infrastructure
                            11. The cost of new technologies is a fraction of the cost of
     becomes resilient.         infrastructure service interruptions. However, the benefits of new
                                technologies for resilience can be short-lived if infrastructure
                                agencies and asset operators do not establish strong standards,
                                incentives, and an organizational culture that fosters innovation
                                and learning. Furthermore, the most cost-effective technologies
                                do not necessarily require high-tech solutions at the forefront of
                                innovation.

                            12. With clear policies, guidance and incentives, the private sector can
                                be an ally in the technological transformation for infrastructure
                                resilience.

                            13. Technology is evolving rapidly — its integration into resilience
                                efforts should too. New infrastructure should be designed in a
                                manner that can easily accommodate evolving technologies.


V                           14. Infrastructure failures not only have significant economic impacts
     Resilient                  but also increase a country’s public debt burden and lower its
     infrastructure             credit ratings.
     financing requires
                            15. No single instrument can fully cover all disaster-related risks.
     a layered approach,
                                A combination of financial instruments, including dedicated
     with a range               resilience budget lines, contingent budgets, loans, insurance, and
     of instruments             fast access to international grants and soft credit, is needed. Each
     available to absorb,       of these can be used at different times before, during, and after a
     respond to, and            disaster.
     recover from
     the impacts of         16. Risk transfer through insurance instruments can provide
                                resources faster than emergency appeals to external donors in
     disasters.
                                a post-disaster situation. Ministries of finance and infrastructure
                                agencies can consider a range of insurance products as part of
                                an overall disaster financing strategy. These products include
                                property and asset insurance, public asset insurance, sector-wide
                                insurance, and catastrophic risk products.

                            17. Systematic investments in maintenance, retrofitting, data
                                systems, and capacity building for infrastructure professionals
                                are indispensable to building infrastructure resilience.
                                These resilience measures are less visible than building new
                                infrastructure or rebuilding after disasters. However, these
                                ‘invisible’ measures can bring immense benefits. The survey
                                shows that these actions receive inadequate funding across
                                countries of all income levels.

                            18. Poorer regions within a country and small, low-income countries
                                cannot ignored. Even small investments to strengthen resilience
                                in areas with a high infrastructure deficit will yield enormous
                                social and economic benefits.



                                               16
                                           Key Messages
VI                          19. CDRI’s Global Infrastructure Resilience Survey received
      Infrastructure            responses from over 3,000 professionals across more than
      resilience requires       100 countries. A key message from the survey findings is that
      strong coordination       strengthening policies, standards, codes, and regulations that
      across government         adequately address resilience and consider future climate risks
      agencies,                 is the most critical action governments can take.
      infrastructure        20. Procurement processes are critical to embedding resilience into
      asset owners,             infrastructure projects. Beyond applying technical codes and
      operators,                standards, procurement documents, especially at the design and
      businesses and            planning stages, should explicitly include resilience.
      communities.
                            21. Infrastructure agencies alone cannot fix the resilience challenge.
                                They need the support of ministries of finance and planning,
                                disaster risk management agencies, subnational governments,
                                standard-setting bodies, and the private sector. Resilience is
                                everybody’s business.

                            22. Infrastructure agencies and disaster risk management
                                authorities must work together to develop integrated disaster
                                preparedness plans, organize drills, strengthen and utilize early
                                warning systems for critical infrastructure services, and mobilize
                                resources for faster and complete reconstruction of more
                                resilient infrastructure.



VII                         23. Nature-based Solutions (NbS) offer cost-effective, adaptive ways
      Policies,                 to build resilient infrastructure with ecological and social co-
      governance                benefits. Supported by strong policies and monitoring, NbS can
      frameworks,               complement traditional infrastructure. They require proactive
      standardized              maintenance and strong engagement across various sectors
      technical                 (water, transport, environment, and disaster risk management),
      guidance and              as well as among different actors, including local communities
                                and indigenous groups. Infrastructure agencies will also need
      well-designed
                                to acquire technical expertise in ecology and related fields, in
      financial
                                addition to traditional engineering skills.
      instruments are
      necessary to move     24. To scale up the implementation of Nature-based Solutions for
      NbS from pilots           resilient infrastructure, they should be embedded in master
      to mainstream             plans, infrastructure strategies, and concession agreements,
      infrastructure            ensuring that NbS are considered from the outset of
      practice.                 infrastructure planning for adaptation, water security, and hazard
                                mitigation, not as optional add-ons.

                            25. The availability of financial resources and well-designed
                                instruments is indispensable to scaling the use of NbS.
                                Instruments such as blended finance, PPPs, and performance-
                                based contracts align incentives for both public and private
                                actors.




                                               17
                                           Key Messages
Seafront in Gold Coast, Australia
Source: Getty Images




                                        18
                                    Key Messages
         EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



         How to Make
         Infrastructure
         Resilience a Core
         Economic Strategy




    19
Key Messages
                                         Flooded homes in Fatikchhari, Chittagong, Bangladesh Source: Shutterstock



Introduction

GIR 2023 Report: The Infrastructure Resilience Challenge
One of the world’s most pressing problems is the growing damage and destruction of roads,
ports, dams, power grids, railways, factories, buildings, sewer systems, and countless other
forms of critical infrastructure from the increasingly severe impacts of climate change, such
as devastating floods and landslides, storm surges, searing heatwaves, and disasters such as
earthquakes.

Both the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, endorsed by 193 countries, and the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (SFDRR), 2015–2030, recognize the urgent
imperative of making the world’s infrastructure more resilient, especially as the number of
disasters increases, from an annual average of 371 during 2004–2023 to 393 events in 2024.
The latest Global Assessment Report (GAR) estimates that while the inflation-adjusted direct
cost of disasters was around $180–$200 billion annually, the annual figure is close to $2.3
trillion when wider social and ecosystem losses are taken into account (UNDRR, 2025).

To address this challenge, the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI), through its
landmark Global Infrastructure Resilience (GIR 2023) report, provided a global estimate and
visualization of infrastructure risks and the ‘resilience dividend’, offering a solid economic and
social imperative for investing in infrastructure resilience.

The report introduced the Global Infrastructure Risk Model and Resilience Index (GIRI), the
first-ever publicly available tool for estimating infrastructure risks and calculated that damage
to global infrastructure from geological and climate-related disasters amounts to more than
$700 billion per year. The indirect economic and human toll is far higher than the value of the
direct damage from individual geological or weather events. For instance, hurricane winds




                                                 20
                                         Executive Summary
not only flatten schools—they can also set back students’ education by months or years, with
long-term economic and employment consequences. Similarly, floods that damage sewage
systems and water treatment plants can lead to the spread of waterborne diseases, sicken or
kill thousands of people, and devastate communities.

The GIR 2023 report also highlighted that the financial consequences of infrastructure
damage and losses from disasters and weather events are huge. This is especially true in
low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), which already face a $3-trillion finance gap in their
ability to invest in more resilient infrastructure. In many countries and situations, the lack of
resilience can create a vicious economic circle: Rebuilding after disasters depletes national
reserves, raises already high debt burdens, increases borrowing costs, and reduces economic
output and gross domestic product (GDP). This makes it even more difficult to respond
effectively to the next disaster or to invest more in resilience, further worsening the countries’
financial situations.

However, if making infrastructure more resilient is one of the most significant challenges of
our time, the GIR 2023 report also highlighted a significant opportunity. Bridges, roads, ports,
power grids, and every other type of infrastructure that are stronger and more resilient not only
will suffer less costly damage when disasters strike than their less resilient counterparts do,
but they also bring multiple indirect benefits, such as improved productivity, faster economic
growth, poverty reduction, lower national debt, and greater equity. These myriad benefits add
up to what is known as the resilience dividend.

The GIR 2023 report estimated that the overall benefits of investments in resilience far
outweigh the costs, on average, by at least four times. And for many specific infrastructure
assets and sectors, cost–benefit ratios are much higher. When Peru rehabilitated or built
dykes to better control flooding in the Casca River Valley, for example, the benefits were 37.5
times higher than the costs.

The GIR 2023 report was a call to action. The world is at a crossroads, it warned. Countries
can continue to build back the same after disasters, leading to a worrisome future of
declining growth rates, rising risks, increasing liabilities, and greater chances of stranded
assets. Or, they can capture the resilience dividend, creating a safer, more resilient, more
prosperous world.

Taking Action: The Second Report’s Practical Guide to More Resilient
Infrastructure
This second report from CDRI, GIR 2025, is an answer to that call to action. It builds on the
GIR 2023 report, providing detailed and practical ideas and roadmaps to help countries
capture the biggest possible infrastructure resilience dividend.

For the first time, the report defines and analyses in depth three specific and crucial
capacities needed to reap the benefits of infrastructure resilience. The first is the capacity of
infrastructure and systems to absorb the shock from a disaster. Urban rain gardens and well-
maintained drainage systems can absorb or safely carry away water from extreme storms,
thereby preventing devastating floods. Buildings, bridges, roads, and ports can be designed
and built stronger to withstand the impacts of disasters more effectively, preventing them
from entirely collapsing or being damaged and ensuring that goods continue to flow.




                                                 21
                                          Executive Summary
                                              Rebuilding damaged bridges in Kedarnath, India Source: Shutterstock



The second is the capacity to respond when disaster events occur. Effective early warning
systems can alert infrastructure agencies and operators, as well as people and businesses,
to prepare or move out of harm’s way when disasters loom. Governments can have disaster
preparedness plans and mechanisms in place to rapidly repair railway tracks torn up by
quakes or storms, or provide safe drinking water and sanitation in flooded cities.

The third is the capacity to recover from disasters. This includes the ability not only to rebuild
when assets are damaged or destroyed rapidly, but also to rebuild better and stronger,
thereby increasing the capacity to absorb future events.

The threats are growing as climate change intensifies floods, droughts, heatwaves, and other
weather events. Increasing these three capacities—to absorb, to respond, and to recover
better from disasters—therefore should be at the core of every country’s economic strategy.

One of the key messages from this report is that it is critical to reconstruct as rapidly as
possible. The macroeconomic modelling exercise undertaken as part of the report shows
that annual economic losses from disasters can be as high as 7 percent of a country’s GDP
when full reconstruction takes 20 years or more. Fully rebuilding in 10 years cuts the annual
economic loss in half. Reduce that time to four years or even one year—as Japan has been
able to do after some disasters—and the economic and human toll is even lower, preventing
the vicious economic cycle that now affects many nations after disasters strike.

Using modelling, surveys, interviews, extensive case studies, and other analyses, the GIR
2025 report charts a path to increasing the three capacities—that is, absorb, respond, and
recover—and maximizing the resilience dividend. It identifies significant shortfalls in crucial
areas, such as national resilience frameworks, resilience finance, and governance, and shows
how those gaps can be addressed. It documents how innovative technologies can help build
resilience of infrastructure and how nature-based solutions (NbS) such as living breakwaters
in Nigeria or green corridors in Medelin, Colombia, cost-effectively improve resilience,
especially when carefully combined with traditional hard or ‘grey’ infrastructure.




                                                22
                                         Executive Summary
In contrast to many previous reports on adaptation and resilience, where the focus is on the
roles of disaster agencies, the core audiences for this report are those who face the threats
of worsening disasters directly. For example, the head of airport operations, the technical
director at the ministry of roads, city managers, ministers of finance, and the operators of
ports, utilities, or urban services.

In addition, this report broadens and deepens the analysis from the GIR 2023 report. Instead
of focusing solely on specific infrastructure assets, such as individual bridges, roads, or
power lines, it assesses the larger networks, services, and users that depend on those
assets. Making networks more resilient can significantly limit the economic impacts of
shocks even when specific assets are destroyed. For instance, a power grid that can instantly
reroute electricity around downed transmission towers or flooded transformers will be better
able to keep lights on and the machines humming at most local businesses, preventing
economic disruptions from the loss of services.

The GIR 2025 report’s individual chapters cover risk assessments, insights from a global
survey with professionals and businesses, the potential contributions of innovative
technologies, and ideas for better governance, increased finance, and the application of
NbS for infrastructure resilience. Each chapter includes key messages and checklists for
governments and stakeholders to assess their own capacities and needs and is supported by
additional analyses and examples in corresponding working papers. The report thus offers
an actionable roadmap and practical guide for increasing all three key capacities, enabling
countries around the world to seize and maximize the infrastructure resilience dividend.



A Deeper Understanding of Risks

Assessing Infrastructure Risks is the Key First Step to Greater Resilience
Only when risks are measured, they can be appropriately managed. This report conducts a
second round of rigorous modelling exercises, which include the following:

i.   expanding the GIRI model and assessing the impact of heatwaves and cold waves on
     infrastructure assets;

ii. analysing the impact of disasters and climate change on infrastructure sectors,
    including irrigation and renewable energy within the power sector;

iii. regional deep dives covering Africa and Small Island Developing States (SIDS);

iv. projecting additional risk that will be accumulated if countries continue to develop new
    infrastructure with current resilience weaknesses. Additionally, an assessment of the
    economy-wide implications of infrastructure failures resulting from disasters has also
    been conducted.

The findings from the modelling exercise show that under different warming scenarios,
heatwave-related losses will escalate sharply. In contrast, cold wave losses are expected
to decline, indicating a structural shift in the global thermal risk distribution and a change




                                                23
                                         Executive Summary
in the dominant drivers of climate-related infrastructure damage. It also shows that power,
transport, and water systems will face the maximum impacts, with the highest estimated
annual average losses (AAL) under both heatwave and cold wave scenarios, reflecting strong
functional interlinkages and cascading effects across energy demand, mobility, and water
service continuity.

The impact on the irrigation sector is expected to be severe across South and Southeast
Asia, Central America, and Eastern Africa, especially for countries such as Vietnam,
Bangladesh, India, and Thailand, which have a strong agrarian base and rely heavily on
irrigation systems.

Understanding the macroeconomic implications of disasters requires integrated modelling
approaches that capture not only direct damages to infrastructure but also the systemic,
long-term effects of disrupted capital on productivity and production. This report presents
the results from simulations created using the green economy model (GEM), which has been
parametrised and calibrated to align with GIRI. The GEM was used for eight countries with
diverse economic, geographic, and hazard characteristics—Bangladesh, Barbados, Bhutan,
Fiji, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, and the Philippines—to understand the economy-wide
implications of infrastructure failures due to disasters.

The extensive amount of data enabled
the analysts to understand the risks to
infrastructure in unprecedented detail
                                                      Estimated Annual GDP Loss (2025-2050)
for the eight countries studied. For
                                                                         GEM average annual
example, the highest concentrations of
                                                                         GDP loss: 2025 and
vulnerable buildings in Kenya are found               Country            2050 (%)
along the coast of the Indian Ocean                   Bangladesh         10.6
and in the western regions of Lake                    Barbados           8.8
Victoria. It was found that Bangladesh
                                                      Bhutan             3.9
would suffer the greatest economic
                                                      Fiji               4.0
damage among the eight nations, with
                                                      Ghana              6.5
estimated average annual losses of
                                                      Kenya              4.4
10.6 percent of GDP between 2025 and
                                                      Madagascar         4.9
2050 (see table, right).
                                                      Philippines        10.1

The analysis reinforces the conclusion                Average           6.6

that the total economic damages from
disasters (including losses of social
and human capital) are far greater
than the direct costs of rebuilding all the homes, bridges, and electricity grids damaged or
wrecked by each event.

A key finding from the modelling is that the indirect costs incurred by infrastructure
failures due to disasters are more than seven times higher than the costs of the direct
damage to the infrastructure itself. These indirect economic costs include everything from
interruptions in trade to lost jobs and livelihood opportunities. Indeed, the economic losses
due to disruptions of services such as electricity or water are much higher than the direct
damage to assets.




                                                 24
                                          Executive Summary
                                          Heavy rains flood a gas station in New Jersey, USA Source: Getty Images



The magnitude of indirect costs can vary widely among countries depending on the strength
of the connection between infrastructure and the economy; countries that depend heavily
on tourism and trade suffer higher proportions of indirect costs when infrastructure breaks
down. The total indirect costs are even higher than the model indicates, as there are health
and educational impacts that are amplified by failures in infrastructure services due to
disasters. For example, Hurricane Maria devastated Puerto Rico in 2017, destroying almost
the entire electricity grid and damaging more than half of all local businesses. Power was
still not fully restored 18 months later, causing long-term economic damage. Between 8,000
and 10,000 small businesses were forced to close permanently. Similarly, a deadly 2011
flood in Thailand disrupted the lives of more than 13 million people; impaired supply chains
for products such as automobiles and electronics; reduced total household expenditures
by up to 14 percent. The total damage and losses from the flood corresponded to 1.1
percent of the country’s GDP. In both cases, the indirect costs were far higher than the direct
impacts on infrastructure.

It is therefore crucial to consider these significant indirect costs when making decisions
about investments in resilience. The modelling results emphasize the importance of
increasing the capacity of infrastructure to absorb the shocks from disasters by proactively
strengthening roads, ports, schools, or other assets; by building them back better and
stronger after damaging events; and by designing new infrastructure to be more resilient.
Such steps will deliver multiple benefits, including stimulating economic growth, creating
jobs, cutting losses, and reducing the need for reconstruction from future events.

Economic Damages can be Dramatically Reduced through Increased Resilience
and Faster Recoveries and Reconstruction
In addition to highlighting the critical importance of building back better, the
macroeconomic analysis demonstrates that countries can mitigate the economic impacts
of disasters by recovering and reconstructing their economies fully and promptly. The




                                               25
                                        Executive Summary
modelling indicates that the average GDP impact in 2050 across the eight countries studied
would decline from 7.4 percent of the GDP with slow and partial reconstruction to 3 percent
with full reconstruction over 10 years, and down to just 2.3 percent if reconstruction is
completed in four years.

Opportunities for African Nations
For this report, CDRI conducted a first-ever comprehensive review of the risks to
infrastructure in Africa. The analysis estimated that the current average losses from
disasters are $12.7 billion per year, with 70 percent of those losses being caused by
floods and most of the rest due to earthquakes. For some countries, such as Lesotho and
Mauritius, the annual economic damages add up to more than 1 percent of their GDP.

The analysis also assessed what types of
infrastructure are most at risk. Topping             Infrastructure most at risk in Africa
the list is power generation, followed by
telecommunications and then roads and                                  3%
                                                                  4%
railways (see figure, right).                                9%                      Power
                                                                                     Telecom
                                                                                     Roads and
African countries face numerous barriers                15%
                                                                                      railways
                                                                            46%      Water and
to reducing these vulnerabilities. They                                               wastewater
have limited resources for increasing the                                            Oil and gas
                                                                                     Ports and
resilience of existing roads, ports, water                                            airports
                                                              23%
supplies, and other key assets, or for
setting aside reserves to build back after
disasters.

However, they also have three potential advantages. Much of the infrastructure needed to
expand access to services such as electricity, water, and sanitation, and to accommodate
growing cities and populations, is yet to be built. It is far more cost-effective to construct
new assets with additional resilience built in than it is to retrofit existing ones.

Second, Africa has abundant natural resources that could be leveraged to provide NbS that
protect existing and future infrastructure. For example, protection for forests and wetlands
upstream of cities can both help tame floods and ensure more sustainable water supplies.

Third, African leaders fully understand the threats from climate change impacts and other
disasters. They have demonstrated their political will to act with policies such as the African
Union Climate Change and Resilient Development Strategy and Action Plan (2022–2032).

Small Island Developing States Face Unique Challenges
The Small Island Developing States (SIDS) are particularly vulnerable to threats such as
tropical cyclones, storm surges, sea level rise, and droughts. Many of these nations depend
on a single port or airport and a coastal road that encircles each island, decreasing their
capacity to absorb shocks. If a storm impairs even one link in that infrastructure, the whole
island transport system can fail, with serious economic and social consequences.

Indeed, major storms are taking an enormous toll. In 2017, Hurricane Maria caused $182
million in damages to the transportation infrastructure alone in Dominica. It destroyed or




                                                26
                                         Executive Summary
damaged 95 percent of the island’s homes, with total estimated damages of nearly $1.5
billion—or 225 percent of the nation’s annual GDP.

The analysis in this report shows that while AALs for the SIDS are lower in absolute terms
compared to larger countries, the countries’ relative risks are disproportionately high. Even
small amounts of damage to infrastructure can exceed the capacity of their economies to
recover from disasters.

The report proposes several practical steps to close the resilience gap and boost the
nations’ capacities to absorb, recover from, and reconstruct after devastating events.
They include covering all islands and communities with advanced early warning systems,
developing SIDS-specific building codes, and training engineers, contractors, and
government leaders to use resilient designs and technologies. CDRI is supporting specific
projects to implement these recommendations (see box, below).




                                        Construction and installation of new water pipes in Havana, Cuba Source: iStock



Building Resilience Capabilities in SIDS

At COP26, CDRI launched a flagship programme              and developing drainage and irrigation systems
to build capacity and offer financial and                 in Guyana to reduce vulnerability to floods.
technical aid to all 57 SIDS. Called the                  Others focus on improving responses to and
Infrastructure for Resilient Island States (IRIS),        recoveries after disasters, including building an
the programme supports 24 projects in 25                  early warning system in the Dominican Republic
countries. Some work towards increasing the               and improving the resilience of subsea telecom
capacity to absorb shocks, such as revising               connections for Tonga and Palau.
Haiti’s national building code to strengthen roofs




                                                     27
                                            Executive Summary
Why Infrastructure Resilience is Currently Insufficient

Insights from Infrastructure Experts, Professionals and other relevant
Stakeholders around the World
A Global Infrastructure Resilience Survey of more than 3,000 professionals in over 100
countries, combined with 75 interviews with experts, reveals a worrying picture of countries
lagging far behind in the increasingly urgent race to strengthen infrastructure systems in the
face of the accelerating impacts of disasters and climate change.

Only 15 percent of the respondents believe that governments have the institutional capacities
needed to meet the resilience challenge. Even when national policies and frameworks are
more advanced, as in many high- and upper-middle-income countries, implementing those
policies at the local level is being crippled by shortages of skilled staff, limited financial
resources, and fragmented responsibilities. And while the private sector is seen as having
greater capacities and expertise than government agencies do, only about one-third of the
respondents think that those private sector capacities and resources are adequate. Moreover,
expertise is typically concentrated in large firms and international consultancies, creating
systemic resilience gaps. As one expert describes, relying on a few isolated pockets of
excellence cannot deliver resilience at the scale that is required.

It is not surprising, then, that only 26 percent of the respondents say that hazard and risk
assessments are performed consistently. Only 12 percent report the consistent use of advanced
technologies, such as sensors and satellite imagery, for real-time disaster warnings and damage
assessments. Only 15 percent say that proven NbS are consistently mandated or applied.

The experts also believe that available resources are too focused simply on building back the
same structures after the floodwaters recede or the hurricane passes, and that far more effort
is being put into responding to and recovering from disasters than in working to reduce risks
before floods or other disasters strike. In addition, there is systematic underinvestment in so-
called ‘invisible’ resilience measures, such as better maintenance, retrofitting, data systems,
and capacity building, which can be some of the most cost-effective approaches.

The survey and interviews confirm what other research has suggested: that infrastructure
resilience is constrained not by the availability of technical solutions, but by shortfalls
in governance and institutional capacities. In particular, half of the respondents say that
standards, regulations, and policies must be at the core of resilience strategies, yet only 22
percent say that current policies and standards are adequate even for the risks that the world
faces today, let alone the increasing future risks on a warming planet.

Businesses Face Enormous Losses, but Leaders Warn that Resilience
Investments and Capacities Fall Far Short of What is Needed
As countries experience increasingly severe impacts of climate change, along with geological
events, so do businesses around the world. Disasters cause cascading impacts that often
extend far beyond the direct damage to factories, stores, power grids, pipelines, and other
infrastructure. Floods that damage manufacturers’ machinery can also halt operations for
weeks; for example, the lost production slashes profits and puts people out of work. Supply
chains can be cut, affecting every downstream business and retail outlet that depends on the
goods being shipped.


                                               28
                                        Executive Summary
                            Winter Storm Uri covered the Tesla Giga Texas facility outside in Austin Source: Shutterstock



In 2021, Winter Storm Uri caused major power outages and water supply disruptions
across Texas, United States, forcing Samsung’s semiconductor plant in Austin to shut
down for a month. Not only were thousands of silicon wafers ruined, resulting in an
estimated $270–$360 million loss for Samsung, but the lost production also contributed
to an existing global chip shortage, affecting the production and delivery of products such
as smartphones and automobiles. Following an earthquake in Japan in March 2011, 656
small- to medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) went bankrupt within a year, resulting in the loss
of more than 10,000 jobs.

Already, disasters are reducing annual profits for businesses by an estimated 15 percent. If
global temperatures rise to 3°C above pre-industrial levels, corporate profits are projected to
fall by 25 percent by 2050.

These threats underscore the urgent need for businesses to invest in the capacity to absorb
shocks and recover and reconstruct quickly. The good news is that these investments can
be enormously cost-effective, with benefits shown to be up to 35 times the costs.

To understand whether businesses currently perceive the threats and the opportunities, and
to assess their current levels of preparedness, CDRI conducted the first-ever global survey
focusing on the impacts of infrastructure failures and service disruptions on businesses.
More than 500 high-level executives (including CEOs and chief sustainability officers)
answered questions about how disasters affect their operations, how their companies are
responding, and what help they need from the governments. The survey targeted three
groups of businesses: private infrastructure companies and state-owned enterprises, such
as utilities, railways, and ports; large companies, such as manufacturers, agribusinesses,
real estate, and logistics; and SMEs, including suppliers and service providers. It focused
on six sectors: food; chemicals and pharmaceuticals; consumer goods; heavy industry;
logistics and transportation; and real estate. The responses from the survey were also
bolstered by interviews, focus groups, and case studies.




                                                     29
                                             Executive Summary
The results reinforce the massive benefits of investing in resilience. In one particularly
striking example, Toyota responded to severe disruptions in its supply chains and
a major dip in profits after a 2011 earthquake by diversifying its suppliers, building
strategic inventories, and implementing new risk management protocols. When floods hit
western Japan in 2018, causing $10 billion in business losses overall and forcing other
car manufacturers to reduce production for two months, Toyota was able to restore its
operations within three days and suffered no material losses.

However, the survey shows that such successes are still rare and that current investments
are falling far short of what is needed. In the large business group, 82 percent of the
respondents have continuity plans for disasters, but only 39 percent of those plans have
been tested. Similarly, 78 percent have disaster risk management policies, but 40 percent
lack detailed operating procedures. Around 60 percent still rely on ad-hoc responses, with
52 percent reporting that they lack a dedicated crisis response team. Further, 77 percent
say that government policies designed to improve resilience are either entirely absent or
poorly enforced. The survey shows that the key challenges in restoring critical operations
after disasters include delays in external support, poor internal coordination, and shortages
of skilled personnel.

Infrastructure companies face similar challenges as large businesses, though they are
more likely to have disaster risk management policies and use technologies that enhance
resilience, such as risk analysis and early warning systems.

The SMEs are the least able to cope with disasters, the survey shows. Only 35 percent
report that they have detailed continuity plans, and 54 percent say that they lack access
to affordable finance, real-time climate information, and insurance products. With limited
financial capacity, most SMEs treat resilience spending as discretionary, leaving them
vulnerable to even moderate shocks and forcing them to spend their limited resources trying
to rebuild and recover from disasters rather than trying to prevent damage from occurring.

The results highlight the critical importance of embedding adaptation and resilience at
every stage in the business lifecycle—from strategy and planning to operations and end-of-
life—rather than simply making isolated interventions. The report recommends actions in
five critical areas: (i) implementing supportive policies, such as tax incentives and subsidies
for resilience, post-disaster support, and resilience requirements; (ii) adopting technologies,
such as early warning systems, remote sensing, and supply chain mapping; (iii) increasing
finance through insurance, budgeting, liquidity tools, and others; (iv) improving governance,
such as through better standards, crisis response protocols; and (v) building capacity
through training, education, and regular emergency drills.




                                               30
                                        Executive Summary
Technologies for Resilient Infrastructure

Advanced Technologies Pay Back Their Costs Many Times Over
Even as threats to infrastructure grow due to the increasing severity of climate change
impacts, existing and new technologies offer transformative opportunities to make the
world’s built assets more resilient, helping to absorb shocks better and respond and recover
more quickly and effectively.

CDRI reviewed more than 35 types of technologies and several case studies from around the
world demonstrating their use. The review shows that these technologies typically pay for
themselves many times over by reducing the costs of building and maintaining infrastructure
assets; helping to increase the capacity to absorb shocks and thus avoid billions of dollars in
losses; and enabling faster recovery and reconstruction after events occur.

These technologies fall into three main functional categories (see figure, below). The first is
improving the collection, processing, and use of information. Remote or embedded sensors
can report in real time when river levels climb past a dangerous threshold or when power
lines or bridges begin to fail, providing crucial early warnings and enabling authorities and
operators to take actions to save lives and to better absorb the impacts of shocks.

Drones can be dispatched to assess damage to buildings or measure the spread of
floodwater, as well as to monitor everything from roads to crops (see box, next page).




  Remote sensing, sensor networks,
  drones, 360 imagery, IoT, social         Virtual reality, AI, social media,   Batteries, construction materials,
  media, smart devices, cloud              platforms, satellites, 5G, digital   3D printing, robotics, drones, AI
  computing, digital twins, AI+, VR+,      twins, blockchain etc.               software, etc.
  BIM, big data, AMS, etc.



                                                                                • Improved asset performance
                                           • Digital collaboration tools
  • Data collection                                                             • Improved construction practices
                                           • Effective alert systems and
  • Data processing                                                             • Increased redundancy in systems
                                             processes
  • Decision support                                                            • Improved operating and
                                           • Targeted communication
                                                                                  maintenance processes




                                               Improving connectivity,
     Improving the data value                                                      Strengthening asset and
                                                communication, and
              chain                                                                 network performance
                                                   collaboration




                                        Resilient Infrastructure
                                                            31
                                                   Executive Summary
                                                                      Drones help fight wildfires Source: Shutterstock



Drones Improve Capacities to Absorb and Recover from Shocks

In the United Kingdom, drones regularly fly               infrastructure before disasters occur, limiting
above the country’s railway tracks, spotting              damage from the shocks.
tiny cracks or shifts in the rails that human
inspectors might miss. In addition, the Humber            Drones have also been used to accurately map
Bridge in Yorkshire is the first suspension bridge        damage to buildings and roads after the 2016
in the world to be inspected for corrosion,               earthquake in Muisne, Ecuador; to monitor
cracks, and cable wear by a fleet of drones using         and fight wildfires in the United States; and to
high-resolution cameras and LiDAR sensors—                create a precise 3D model of the Notre Dame
at a cost savings of £1 million over human                Cathedral after the devastating fire. Such data
inspectors. In both cases, the information                then enables faster and better response and
enables operators to fix weak spots in the                reconstruction.




Sophisticated virtual representations of physical systems, called digital twins, enable
real-time monitoring and control of vital assets. In California, for example, the Yuba Water
Agency uses drones, sensors, and a digital twin of its New Bullards Bar Dam to regularly
monitor the system’s health and performance and to respond more quickly and effectively
to threatening weather events. Similarly, Lisbon, Portugal, used a digital twin to design a
drainage system that will significantly reduce flood risks in the city.

The second group contains technologies that improve connectivity and communication.
Satellite internet services can instantly send data and other key information to and from
systems or communities in remote areas, while GPS allows locations to be precisely mapped.
Mobile apps and social media can alert people, businesses, and emergency personnel to
looming events, helping to guarantee that early warning systems reach everyone at risk.

Tools such as blockchain can assure security and privacy in communications, as Vanuatu
has done in giving each household a secure digital identity, with all transactions recorded
on a tamper-proof ledger. This enables faster and more accurate delivery of relief funds,
thus speeding up recovery and reconstruction. Similarly, AI-powered systems can tailor
warnings to individual households based on location, type of dwelling, and level of risk, as
was done in India when Cyclone Yaas loomed in 2021.




                                                     32
                                            Executive Summary
The third category includes technologies that strengthen or improve the performance and
resilience of infrastructure or enable more rapid reconstruction. Among the many examples
are: solar microgrids or other distributed energy systems that withstand hurricanes better
than vulnerable long-distance transmission lines; high-performance concrete that is less
susceptive to buckling under stresses; 3D-printed or modular homes that can be built
rapidly at a fraction of typical construction costs in case communities are destroyed; and
portable water treatment plants that can be rushed to a flooded community to reduce the
threat of water-borne diseases.

Taken together, these technologies enable governments to make better, more informed
decisions about which assets to rebuild. They also embed greater resilience into
both reconstruction after disasters and the design of new systems, reducing future
vulnerabilities. By lowering infrastructure life cycle costs and improving monitoring,
tracking, and financial accountability, they allow recovery funds to stretch further and have
greater impacts.

To accelerate the deployment of these technologies wisely and equitably, CDRI is now
developing a data and technology strategy that will identify the key players and the
pathways towards a strong enabling environment. The GIR 2025 report also provides a
technology readiness checklist that uses targeted questions to diagnose strengths and
weaknesses; identify areas where technologies and actions would have the greatest
impacts; create comprehensive roadmaps for achievable and sustainable actions; and track
progress and capture lessons learned.



Financing Resilient Infrastructure

Boosting Finance for Resilience—and Using it More Cost-Effectively
Implementing the strategies and recommendations outlined in this report requires access
to the necessary resources to support the efforts. However, the surveys, interviews, and
macroeconomic modelling all point to the same conclusion: the resilience financing gap is
a serious problem. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
the World Bank, and the United Nations Environment Programme estimate that the total
investment needed to improve infrastructure resilience will be $6.9 trillion per year by 2030.
For LMICs alone, that adds up to a gap of $3 trillion per year.

Moreover, most current spending is simply reactive, kicking in only after floods,
earthquakes, and other disasters cause widespread damage rather than being used to
reduce risks before shocks occur. Even this type of financing is seriously inadequate.
The Swiss Re Institute estimates that the so-called protection gap (the disparity between
insured losses and actual damage) was $1.8 trillion in 2022. One example is the aftermath
of a devastating earthquake in Indonesia (see box, next page).

The shortfall in financing for simply replacing what has been damaged has serious long-
lasting consequences, especially for LMICs. It lowers their GDPs, depletes often-limited
reserves, harms credit ratings, and raises their public debt and borrowing costs.




                                               33
                                        Executive Summary
                                                           Damage from the Mamuju earthquake Source: Shutterstock


Financing Instruments Often Fall Short

Facing an average of 289 natural disasters per           strategy’s first test came after the Mamuju
year, with annual direct costs of $1.4 billion,          earthquake in 2021, which collapsed homes,
Indonesia created a National Disaster Risk               hotels, and hospitals, damaged the airport, and
Financing and Insurance Strategy in 2018,                caused widespread blackouts. The finance
which uses government budgets, risk pooling,             strategy paid only $3.95 million—only a fraction
contingency loans, insurance, and other tools            of the replacement costs of the damaged
to pay for rebuilding after disasters occur. The         infrastructure.




For example, models estimate that a 1-in-100-year flood event in Bangladesh would cause
$54 billion in infrastructure damage, mainly to housing, roads, and power generation. This,
in turn, would reduce real GDP by 6.0 percent due to permanent damage to capital and
productivity losses across sectors and, consequently, increase public debt significantly.

Similarly, research shows that a 1-in-100 flood event in Thailand could cause GDP losses
of 3–4.5 percent, triggering a sovereign credit downgrade and raising annual interest
payments by $1.9 billion. However, the analysis also highlights the vital importance of
investing in resilience before disasters strike. Modelling shows that by bolstering flood
defences and the capacity to absorb shocks at a relatively low cost, Thailand could avoid
$30 billion in losses in a 1-in-100-year flood event.

These results emphasize the urgent need for a paradigm shift in infrastructure resilience
finance. Instead of being reactive and concentrating on building back just what was lost or
damaged in disasters, greater investments must be made both in making existing and new
infrastructure more resilient before disasters occur and building back better, which also
includes sufficient investments in maintenance and operations. As part of this paradigm
shift, governments will need to carefully and judiciously balance their resources to ensure
sufficient support for all four key resilience-enhancing measures: improved maintenance,
retrofits to make existing assets more robust, building stronger new infrastructure, and
faster reconstruction and recovery of services after disasters.




                                                    34
                                             Executive Summary
Making this shift and striking the right balance will not be easy. Some of the key challenges
involve governance improvements. One example is defining and implementing infrastructure
resilience standards for all types of disasters, following the model of increasingly stringent
earthquake building codes, such as Japan’s Building Standard Law of 1950, revised in
1981, that have dramatically reduced devastation from earthquakes. Other crucial changes
include mainstreaming the awareness and consideration of disaster resilience into policies
and decisions at all levels of government, in the private sector, and in public–private
partnerships (PPPs), covering everything from construction standards and insurance
requirements to contingency plans and reliability standards.

In particular, ministries of finance and economics, as well as other government institutions,
require expertise to quantify, allocate, and monetize the financial benefits of increased
infrastructure resilience. In many cases, this would show that investing in resilience is often
the most financially sound option. For instance, allocating limited road funds to drainage
systems for reducing flood damage could yield a significantly higher economic return than
using the money to widen a stretch of highway. Similarly, a rigorous analysis of building
standards or utility regulations that boost resilience would confirm that they offer high
cost–benefit ratios, helping to overcome potential opposition to their upfront costs.

However, to close the resilience finance gap, it is also critical to make more funds available
for all three resilience capacities: absorbing, responding to, and recovering from shocks.
Possible financial instruments for increasing the capacity to absorb shocks include
sustainable bonds or dedicated funds. For example, Brazil issued its first sovereign
sustainable bonds in 2023, raising $2 billion. Those resources have been used to finance
a network of rain gardens and parks along waterways to reduce flooding risk in Campinas.
Similarly, in Brazil, the National Land Transport Agency (ANTT) added a 2 percent tariff
on road tolls to fund a sustainability programme for increasing the resilience of federal
highways and railways.

For responding to disasters, financing can come from such instruments as contingency
funds, credit lines, or catastrophe deferred drawdown options (Cat-DDOs). A Cat-DDO
is a form of contingent credit offered by development banks that provides pre-approved
funds, which become available when a country declares a state of emergency. DDOs have
been used successfully by the World Bank and the government of Colombia to respond to
economic harm from the 2011 La Niña weather event and COVID-19.

For recovery and reconstruction, effective financial strategies include regional risk pools,
budget allocations, and dedicated reconstruction funds. For instance, 40 percent of India’s
National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) is dedicated to response and relief, while 30
percent is allocated to recovery and reconstruction.

Insurance can also play a major role. Studies show that every percentage point increase
in insurance penetration (measured as the ratio of non-life premiums versus GDP) can
reduce the recovery times after disasters by nearly 12 months. However, few countries
have developed standalone disaster risk financing strategies that rely heavily on insurance,
creating a ‘protection gap’ that makes full recovery and reconstruction difficult.




                                               35
                                        Executive Summary
As the report describes, these financial instruments may be most effective when ‘layered’,
that is, stacking up various strategies depending on the frequency and severity of events.
For instance, dedicated maintenance or contingency funds can help enable assets to
better absorb or recover from frequent small shocks, while catastrophe bonds can help
reconstruct quickly after major events (see figure, below).

To help governments close the infrastructure resilience finance gap and use resources
more cost-effectively, this report provides a financial resilience pathway for infrastructure
agencies with a series of questions that governments can ask to improve their practices.
For example:

» Is the country’s level of funding for disaster risk reduction adequate, given the
  vulnerability of its infrastructure?

» Is the level of residual risk borne by the country’s public finances sustainable, given the
  macroeconomic characteristics of the country?

» Are governments and asset owners able to determine the most effective balance of
  investments in maintenance, retrofits, building new, more resilient infrastructure, and
  disaster responses that lead to full and fast reconstruction of assets and recovery of
  services?

» Do governments have the capacity to identify the weakest links in road networks, airports,
  and other infrastructure, and the expertise to identify the most cost-effective use of the
  available finance strategies, including the potential layering of financial instruments?

The answers to these questions will help guide governments as they create detailed action
plans for selecting and implementing the best financing options.




 Low-frequency/                                              Residual risk
    high-severity
                      Funding for                Alternative risk transfer instruments
events (Transfer)    new stronger
                         assets,                Insurance (property, parametric, sector)
                     maintenance,
 High-frequency/      retrofit, and         Credit lines                          Loans
                     early warning
     low-severity
                        systems          Contingency funds                   Recovery funds
  events (Retain)



                       Absorb                Respond                            Recover




                                                36
                                         Executive Summary
Improving Governance

Embedding Core Principles of Resilience into Every Institution
Improving the resilience of infrastructure is fundamentally a governance challenge. Taking
advantage of the resilience dividend requires actions to be coordinated across many
sectors and at multiple levels.

To identify the critical attributes of effective governance, CDRI reviewed a wide range
of existing governance frameworks and looked for insights from 25 case studies (see
examples in the box, below). The work identified common barriers to effective governance,




                                         Japan builds back with more earthquake-resilient technology Source: Getty Images


Case Studies of Effective Governance

Japan: In addition to the tragic loss of nearly               for the relevant ministries, allowed work to begin
20,000 lives and the massive destruction of homes             immediately, without bureaucratic delays.
and facilities, the Great East Japan Earthquake
ripped up railway tracks, destroyed stations and              Nepal: Decentralized governance and the use
bridges, and flooded trains on the coastal Sanriku            of local knowledge in Nepal’s mountain roads
Railway, bringing all operations on this vital railway        programme have enabled the successful use
link to a halt. Yet the East Japan Railway Company            of bamboo crib walls and low-cost drainage
(JR East) was able to restore some service in five            systems to protect roads from landslides,
days and 90 percent of service within two weeks,              erosion, and floods. The use of local engineers,
becoming a key symbol of the region’s ability                 labour, and materials is not only cost-effective,
to rebound from disaster. One major reason for                but it also embeds resilience into the social fabric
this was effective pre-disaster governance: Pre-              of rural communities, ensuring that the protective
negotiated continuity contracts between JR East               measures will be maintained after external
and suppliers, along with clearly defined roles               funding ends.




                                                         37
                                                Executive Summary
such as information gaps, regulatory bottlenecks, and perverse incentives. In Brazil’s energy
sector, for example, tariff regulations often prevent utilities from classifying resilience
measures as recoverable costs, even though such measures would avoid much greater
costs of future damage.

Another major barrier is highly siloed governance, with fragmented mandates and
overlapping authorities. CDRI’s interviews revealed that responses to crises are delayed by
the lack of clarity about who is responsible for making decisions.

To overcome these barriers, CDRI identified three key concepts. The first is institutional
capacity: having the right institutions, people, systems, and funding in place to ensure
that infrastructure is designed to prepare for and withstand disasters and can be quickly
repaired if damaged. The second is integrity: making sure that institutional decisions are
transparent, legitimate, and accountable. The third is adaptability: the ability to learn from
past shortcomings and improve over time. In Brazil, for example, the National Electric
Energy Agency (ANEEL) has led a climate vulnerability assessment that will help ensure that
plans and tariff regulations are modified to promote resilience instead of being barriers.
In Rome, the Aeroporti di Roma (ADR), which operates the Leonardo Da Vinci Airport, has
created a ‘resilience task force’ with partners from civil protection, emergency services, and
environmental regulators to analyse and address emerging risks and clarify the roles of
each agency and service. That effort has paid off in times of crises, like during the terminal
fire in 2015, where swift coordinated action reduced the potential damage and disruption.

CDRI’s recommendations for improving governance include embedding core principles of
resilience into every institution; integrating resilience throughout the entire life cycles of
key assets (from planning to decommissioning); strengthening enforcement; improving
coordination among agencies and institutions; and prioritizing long-term maintenance.
Everyone in positions of authority must understand the importance of resilience before
meaningful improvements can be made—and resilience should be everybody’s business.



Harnessing the Power of Nature

Scaling Up Nature-based Solutions (NbS)
The tremendous ability of natural systems to deliver cost-effective resilience is now well
established in both theory and practice. Successful examples are found all around the
world, many of which demonstrate the large capacity of NbS to absorb shocks.

As the report describes, permeable green spaces in schoolyards in Paris, France, and rain
gardens in Portland, Oregon, in the United States, are capturing storm water and slowing
runoff, thus reducing flooding threats. Replacing invasive species with olive groves,
vineyards, orchards, and pastures under transmission lines in France and Belgium is
reducing the risk of crippling storm damage to the lines at one-half to one-quarter the cost
of conventional vegetation management, while providing valuable products and creating a
more attractive landscape.




                                                38
                                         Executive Summary
                                 A bamboo fence in Indonesia helps protect from water erosion Source: Getty Images



In Nepal and Hong Kong, engineering solutions combined with nature-informed design is
stabilizing the soil on steep slopes, preventing landslides and erosion that could block or
damage roads in mountainous terrains—and providing jobs that boost local economies.
Moving flood protection dykes back from the Middle Elbe River in Germany has given the
river more room to spread out when rainstorms hit, rejuvenating a degraded landscape and
significantly reducing peak water levels for dense urban centres downstream. In Quito,
Ecuador, the water utility channels a portion of the tariff to a trust fund dedicated to the
implementation and maintenance of upstream NbS for the resilience of its water sources.

In many cases, NbS have been combined with traditional hard or grey infrastructure and
implemented at huge scales, such as the Netherlands’ Room for the River programme. This
successful effort uses a complex system of dykes, groynes, dams, river channels, and other
features to protect the nation’s infrastructure from floods. Other solutions are as simple as
planting trees or leaving rows of corn standing alongside roads in Minnesota, United States,
to act as living snow fences, thus reducing accidents and the need for road maintenance,
with benefits estimated at 46 times the costs.

This report breaks new ground by showing that NbS can do more than absorb shocks—they
also can play a crucial role in building the capacity to maintain critical functions during
shocks and to recover more quickly. When hurricanes or other extreme events occur, forests
can provide safe evacuation routes or floodwaters can be pumped into wetlands. Similarly,
portable green barriers or temporary shading structures can be brought in as an effective
response to flooding or heatwaves. NbS should therefore be positioned as being integral to
emergency and response operations.




                                                 39
                                         Executive Summary
Once the damaging events have passed, NbS also offer pivotal opportunities to build
back stronger and safer, while bringing long-term economic benefits. One effective tool
is assisted natural regeneration, where native trees and shrubs are carefully nurtured to
grow back as quickly as possible. This method can strengthen vulnerable slopes, block
mudslides on roads, provide natural buffers, and restore soils and ecosystems. It can also
increase yields of crops or forest products, raise incomes and improve local economies,
thus strengthening communities’ resilience to future shocks.

Overall, NbS typically costs half as much as building grey infrastructure, such as concrete
flood walls, while delivering equal or greater benefits. Those benefits include long-term
economic gains, environmental improvements, and social benefits, such as improving
health through better air quality and providing additional recreational opportunities.
Nonetheless, the report emphasizes that the decision is not typically choosing a green or a
grey approach but rather identifying the best hybrid grey–green solutions.

The challenge now is moving from the pilot scale to widespread use. CDRI’s analysis of
successful case studies shows that NbS are not a silver bullet. Each location is different
and may require an approach specifically tailored for that location. Scaling up NbS,
therefore, will require action at four different strategic levels: (i) increasing awareness and
capacity in governments and other institutions, and embedding NbS into master plans; (ii)
creating supportive policies; (iii) developing technical expertise at both the government
and contractor levels to identify and build optimal designs, calculate ecological and other
benefits, and monitor and adapt NbS when needed; and (iv) finding the necessary financial
support, in part, by monetizing the co-benefits to strengthen the business case.

To harness this vast natural potential, this report provides a roadmap that governments can
use to select, design, implement, and maintain NbS.



Conclusion

Putting these ideas into action is of utmost urgency. Floods, heatwaves, droughts, hurricanes,
and other impacts of climate change and geological hazards are becoming more extreme
and deadly. Without redoubled efforts now to build all three capacities (absorb, respond, and
recover) necessary for improved resilience, countries risk a downward spiral in economic and
human capital, characterized by slowing GDP growth, increasing debt, and stumbling poverty
reduction efforts.

But countries can choose to avoid this darker future. Instead of simply rebuilding the same as
before after floods tear through communities or earthquakes destroy buildings, nations can
build back better and stronger. They can proactively plan, design, and build new infrastructure
to enhance their resilience. They can harness a wide array of technologies and solutions
that will limit or even prevent damage from disasters, while also helping to rebuild faster and
better. By putting infrastructure resilience at the core of their economic and development
strategies, countries can create a safer, more prosperous, and more equitable world.




                                                40
                                         Executive Summary
                                                                EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




                                                                Memorandums




Aerial view of the Orwell bridge carrying
the A14 road in Ipswich, Suffolk, UK
Source: Getty Images




                                                   41
                                            Executive Summary
                                           Estaiada Bridge with the city in Sao Paulo, Brazil Source: Getty Images




Memorandum to Finance Ministers

Investments in Resilience will Bring a Sounder Financial Future
In addition to perennial problems like trade tensions and budget deficits, you and other
finance ministers are now facing growing damage and destruction to infrastructure from
the increasingly severe impacts of climate change and from disasters like earthquakes. The
global annual average loss and damage from such disasters is estimated at $732 billion
and climbing.

As you well know, rebuilding after such disasters further depletes national reserves,
raises already high debt burdens, increases borrowing costs, and reduces economic
output and GDP—making it even harder to respond to the next disaster. The second
Global Infrastructure Resilience (GIR 2025) report from the Coalition for Disaster Resilient
Infrastructure (CDRI) documents disasters cause cascading economic costs that dwarf
the direct damages to infrastructure. When roads and ports fail, products do not get to
the market. When electricity and water services are interrupted, business and household
activities can be crippled—often for months. The indirect costs are, on average, more than 7
times the cost of direct damage to infrastructure assets.

That’s why we hope you will find this report is both timely and useful. CDRI’s Global
Infrastructure Risk Model and Resilience Index (GIRI) can provide you with estimated
losses for your country and, in many cases, pinpoint the infrastructure and regions that are
most at risk.


                                             42
                                         Memorandums
More importantly, the report offers a roadmap that you can follow to significantly reduce
your country’s future direct and indirect losses from damage to infrastructure and put the
nation’s finances on a sounder footing, both in the near- and long-term.

A key first message of this report and many others is that boosting infrastructure
resilience brings huge pay offs, with benefit-cost ratios that are four times the investment,
and in some cases, twenty-fold. So even as you face the usual pressing and immediate
budget challenges, you might consider giving resilience financing a much higher priority,
mainstreaming the goal of increasing infrastructure resilience into all financial decisions.

The second key message is that improving resilience is not just a matter of building back
better and stronger after disasters strike. It can also be remarkably cost-effective to retrofit
existing assets or to maintain them more proactively and effectively. This report offers
numerous examples of technologies and other solutions that can improve all types of
resilience, from early warning systems to nature-based solutions for absorbing and reducing
the impacts of disasters like floods or heatwaves.

The third message is the critical importance of recovering and reconstructing as quickly
as possible after disasters. The report’s economic modeling shows that that annual
economic losses from disasters can be as high as 7 percent of a country’s GDP when
full reconstruction takes 20 years or more, which is common. Fully rebuilding in 10 years
cuts the annual economic damage in half, and the damages drop even more with faster
reconstruction.

There will never be sufficient funding to do everything needed for resilient infrastructure.
However, risk assessment and cost-benefit analysis tools like those developed by CDRI and
partners can help identify the most cost-effective investments. Moreover, GIR 2025 offers
a guide to the financial instruments that governments can use to improve each type of
resilience.

For example, sustainable bonds or dedicated funds can be used to increase the capacity
of existing assets to absorb shocks; for responding to disasters, financing can come from
contingency funds, credit lines, or catastrophe deferred drawdown options (Cat-DDOs); for
rapid recovery and reconstruction, effective financial strategies include regional risk pools,
budget allocations, and dedicated reconstruction funds. These financial instruments may be
most effective when ‘layered’, stacking up different strategies depending on the frequency
and severity of events. The report provides a list of questions that can help guide you to the
most effective strategies.

The increasing threats to infrastructure assets from disasters are making your job more
difficult than it already is. But there is an opportunity for you to put your country on a better,
more prosperous path through investments in infrastructure resilience—and we hope that
GIR 2025 can help you do that.




                                                43
                                           Memorandums
                                                   Highway bridge construction in Thailand Source: Getty Images




Memorandum to Ministers of Infrastructure
and Heads of Utilities

Improving the Resilience of the Infrastructure You Oversee Brings Major
Benefits
As the leader of your ministry of infrastructure or a key utility, you are now facing growing
damage and destruction because of the increasingly severe impacts of climate change and
disasters like earthquakes. The global annual average loss and damage from such disasters
is estimated at $732 billion and climbing.

The second Global Infrastructure Resilience (GIR 2025) report from the Coalition for Disaster
Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI) documents that disasters typically cause cascading economic
impacts that dwarf the direct damages to infrastructure. When key infrastructure like
roads and ports fail, products do not get to market. When electricity and water services are
interrupted, business and household activities can be crippled—often for months. The indirect
costs are, on average, more than 7 times the cost of direct damages to infrastructure assets.

It is critical, therefore, that you do everything possible to make your infrastructure better
able to withstand the shocks from severe weather events and other disasters, to recover
faster in the aftermath of disasters, and to design and build new infrastructure to be more
resilient. The good news is that resilience pays. On average the benefits of investments in
resilience are four times larger than the costs, and many interventions have much higher
benefit-cost ratios.




                                              44
                                          Memorandums
The GIR 2025 report has been carefully crafted to help you realize the many benefits
of improved infrastructure resilience. It is based on robust evidence from CDRI’ Global
Infrastructure Risk Model and Resilience Index (GIRI) that can help pinpoint infrastructure
risks in your country and estimate potential losses from disasters. The report provides deep
analysis and numerous case studies to identify practical strategies to improving all three
key capabilities of infrastructure resilience; the abilities to better absorb shocks, to respond
more effectively when disasters hit, and to recover faster.

Your agency can promote the use risk assessments and cost-benefit analysis to quantify
the large direct and indirect benefits of actions that improve resilience and monetize the
savings from improved resilience. For instance, new technologies hold immense promise
for transforming the resilience of infrastructure systems. They can help improve the data
value chain, communication, and the robustness of infrastructure systems. Remote sensors
can spot impending disasters before they strike and trigger more effective responses, for
example, real-time control systems can instantly reroute power around downed transmission
lines or flooded transformers on the electricity grid. Other strategies include harnessing
nature’s power to mitigate shocks, the way green corridors in Brazil protect communities
from floods, while replacing invasive species with olive groves, vineyards and orchards.

Investing in retrofitting programmes and stronger new assets, and seemingly “invisible”
measures such as maintenance, capacity building and readiness for rapidly reconstructing
after disasters, and technical codes and standards can bring immense benefits.

To fund these resilience actions, GIR 2025 recommends a layered approach that combines
dedicated resilience budget lines, contingent budgets and loans, insurance, access to
international grants, and other financial instruments. Each of these can be used at different
times before, during, and after a disaster, since no single instrument can fully cover all
disaster-related risks.

CDRI recognizes that infrastructure agencies cannot meet the resilience challenge
alone. You will need the support of the ministries of finance and planning, disaster risk
management agencies, subnational governments, the private sector, and many others. But
your leadership will be crucial. CDRI hopes that this report will be valuable in helping you
to improve the resilience of the crucial infrastructure that you oversee—and to bring major
benefits to all those who depend on your work.




                                               45
                                          Memorandums
                                            Cleanup begins after a landslide in El Chaco, Ecuador Source: iStock




Memorandum to Heads of
Disaster Risk Management Agencies

DRM Agencies Have Critical and Unique Roles in Increasing Infrastructure
Resilience
As the economic and human toll from the impacts of climate change and other disasters
increases, your disaster risk management (DRM) agency is uniquely positioned to play a
crucial and unique role in enhancing the resilience of all types of infrastructure.

Your central responsibility is coordinating preparedness and emergency response services
when disasters occur. To mount an effective response, your emergency teams need critical
services like power, water, communications, transportation, healthcare, and shelter. This
requires a strong engagement with utilities and infrastructure agencies.

Beyond that, the DRM agency needs to work with infrastructure agencies to ensure they
have the capacity to apply risk assessment and cost-benefit analysis tools to design
their investment plans and projects to be more resilient. You can also make a valuable
contribution by working with ministries of finance to set up and manage the financial
instruments needed for effective recovery and reconstruction after disasters. In all these
cases, early engagement and clear operational rules agreed in advance with infrastructure
agencies are essential for success.




                                             46
                                        Memorandums
As is generally observed, the capacities of infrastructure agencies at sub-national levels
tend to be weaker than those of national agencies. But these regional or local organizations
also typically have the best information on the hazards, exposures, and vulnerabilities of
specific regions and communities. This information can be extremely helpful in your plans
for preparedness and emergency responses –– so strong coordination with them is critical.
At the same time, the DRM agency can support these local agencies in developing their own
land use and development plans to increase infrastructure resilience.

Finally, DRM agencies have a unique role in monitoring specific indicators of resilience and
in ensuring that important data can be shared among hydrometeorological and geological
institutions, infrastructure agencies, and local governments.

The Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI) hopes that this second Global
Infrastructure Resilience (GIR 2025) report will help you perform these critical tasks.
It provides deep analyses to identify and estimate risks and damages from disasters,
describes innovative technologies that can improve resilience, offers lessons from
numerous case studies, and provides detailed roadmaps for actions by governments,
business, and other stakeholders. Under your direction, DRM agencies can be critical
leaders in the urgent effort to improve the resilience of infrastructure.




                                             47
                                         Memorandums
                                         Laem Chabang, a key international container port, Thailand Source: iStock




Memorandum to CEOs

Improving Infrastructure Resilience is a Critical Economic Imperative for
Businesses
The growing impacts of climate change and disasters like earthquakes are increasingly
putting the world’s critical infrastructure at risk, causing estimated global annual damages
to the tune of $732 billion.

For businesses, the harm from disasters can be tremendous and far-reaching. If roads
and ports fail, your products may not get to the market and your supply chains may be cut
off. If the electricity grid fails, your company may not be able to operate. Your factories
and other facilities can suffer direct damage from floods and other events. As a result, in
the aftermath of disasters, profitability can plummet—and businesses are often forced to
close.

The second Global Infrastructure Resilience (GIR 2025) report from the Coalition for Disaster
Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI) conducted an economic impact modelling in eight diverse
countries. It shows that the economic costs associated with infrastructure failures due to
disasters are, on average, more than 7 times the cost of direct damages to infrastructure
assets. Increasing resilience is thus a critical economic imperative for businesses, and it is
also cost-effective.




                                               48
                                         Memorandums
For this report, CDRI surveyed more than 500 companies in nearly 60 countries to
understand the impacts of infrastructure service failures caused by disasters on business
operations and profitability.

Your colleagues told us that most large businesses have prepared for disasters—82 percent
have business continuity plans. However, close to 40 percent of them have never tested
those plans. Moreover, 40 percent of the companies lack detailed standard operating
procedures or execution guidelines for their disaster response plans. Nearly two-thirds of
them lack access to reliable providers of resilience solutions.

77 percent of your fellow business leaders say that government policies for resilience
are either absent or poorly enforced. And 85 percent of large firms do not consider the
resilience of suppliers when they select vendors. If suppliers are affected by a disaster,
crucial inputs may not be available.

As GIR 2025 describes, tackling these shortfalls and building resilience in businesses
requires more than isolated interventions. It demands a systemic approach that embeds
resilience across every stage of the business lifecycle, from strategy and planning to
operations. It is also vital to improve the three key capabilities of resilience; the ability to
better absorb shocks, to respond more effectively when disasters strike, and to recover
faster.

Firms that build these end-to-end resilience capabilities will see important economic gains
and competitive advantages, with shorter downtimes and faster market-share recoveries.
There are also some major market opportunities, such as expanding insurance products or
supplying technologies and services that build resilience.

As you work to build resilience in your own company and supply chains, CDRI hopes that
this report can provide valuable guidance. It documents how innovative technologies can
pay for themselves many times over through avoided damage and faster recovery. It also
offers specific recommendations for businesses, such as building capacity through training
and regular emergency drills and working with governments to craft supportive policies.
Perhaps most importantly, we hope that the report may inspire you to make infrastructure
resilience a top priority for your company.




                                                49
                                            Memorandums
Acknowledgements

Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI)
Co-chairs: Krishna Vatsa (Member, National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) and India Co-chair,
Executive Committee, CDRI); Damien Syed (Deputy Head of Mission, France and CDRI Executive Committee Co-chair)


Director General: Amit Prothi


                                                             International Advisory Board

Coordinating Lead Author                                     Kamal Kishore (United Nations Office for Disaster Risk
Ede Ijjasz                                                   Reduction);
                                                             Rachel Kyte (Foreign, Commonwealth and Development
CDRI Core Team
                                                             Office; University of Oxford, United Kingdom);
Ranjini Mukherjee (Director, Research, Knowledge             Rosa Galvez (Independent Senators Group, Senate of
Management and Capacity Development);                        Canada);
Raina Singh (Lead Specialist, Global Infrastructure          Suman Bery (NITI Aayog, Government of India)
Resilience Report);
Swapnil Saxena (Senior Specialist, Global
Infrastructure Resilience Report);                           High-level Technical Advisory Group
Aishwarya Raj (Senior Specialist, Global
Infrastructure Resilience Report)                            Alexandra Galperin (Former Unit Head, Disaster Risk
                                                             Management, ADB);
Contributors                                                 Eduardo Cavallo (Inter-American Development Bank);
Abhijit Datey                                                Krishna Vatsa (National Disaster Management Authority,
(Lead Specialist-Research);                                  Government of India);
Amit Tripathi                                                Meike van Ginneken (Government of the Netherlands);
(Technical Expert, Power Sector);                            Stéphane Hallegatte (World Bank);
Anshul Yadav                                                 Stuart Fraser (Insurance Development Forum);
(Lead Specialist, Telecommunication Sector)                  Vikram Widge (Climate Policy Initiative)
Raj Vikram Singh
(Senior Specialist, Disaster Risk Financing);
Akash Mishra                                                 Chapter Leads
(Specialist, Financial Sector);                              Chapter 1. Introduction
                                                             Ede Ijjasz and Raina Singh (CDRI)
Communications
                                                             Chapter 2. Risk Assessment: An Indispensable Tool for
David White
                                                             Resilience
(Director, Advocacy and Communications);
                                                             Andrew Maskrey (Independent Expert and Consultant);
Mallika Srinivasan
                                                             Gabriel Bernal, Mabel Marulanda, and Omar Darío
(Lead Specialist, Media & Communications);
                                                             Cardona (INGENIAR Risk Intelligence)
Susan Thomas
(Senior Specialist, Media);                                  Chapter 3. Economic Impacts: Downstream
Payal Bhatnagar                                              Consequences of Infrastructure Failures
(Senior Specialist, Communications)                          Andrea Bassi and Edvin Andreasson (KnowlEdge Srl)

Copyedit                                                     Chapter 4. Views of Resilience Professionals: A Global
Angela Takats                                                Survey
The Clean Copy                                               Savina Carluccio, Fruzsina Csala, George Karagiannis,
John Carey                                                   and Katie Momber (International Coalition for
Chandrahas Choudhury                                         Sustainable Infrastructure)

                                                             Chapter 5. Impacts on Businesses: The Hidden Cost of
Design                                                       Disasters
Brad Amburn and Tiffinbox                                    Ashish Kulkarni, Anirban Mukherjee, Annika Zawadzki,
                                                             Nikhil Bharadwaj, Pranjal Kapoor, Tania Banerjee, and
                                                             Vineet Vijayavargia (Boston Consulting Group)

                                                             Chapter 6. Technologies: Harnessing the Full Potential
                                                             Harriette Stone (Independent Expert and Consultant)




                                                        50
                                                  Acknowledgements
Chapter 7. Financing: Closing the Gap to Capture the            Technical Advisory and Review
Resilience Dividend
Alexandre Chavarot (Climate Finance 2050); Akaraseth            Juliet Mian, Karen Barns (Arup); Arghya Sinha Roy
Puranasamriddhi (University of Oxford, United Kingdom);         (Asian Development Bank); Ajay Lavakare (CDRI); Will
Neeha Mujeeb (Harvard Kennedy School)                           Symons (Deloitte); Fouad Bendimerad (Earthquakes
                                                                and Megacities Initiative); Thomas Maier (European
Chapter 8. Governance and Institutions: The Backbone
                                                                Bank for Reconstruction and Development); Juan Pablo
of Resilience
                                                                Sarmiento (Florida International University, United
Ede Ijjasz (CDRI); Francine Conti (Research Consultant);
                                                                States); Stelios Grafakos (Global Green Growth Institute);
Mia Lott (Research Consultant)
                                                                Karen Sudmeier-Rieux (Independent Expert); Amir Bazaz
Chapter 9. Nature-based Solutions: Partnering with the          (Indian Institute for Human Settlements); Ravi Sinha
Environment                                                     (Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, India); Dora
Floris Boogaard, Hsoc Mathai and Lakshman Srikanth              Suárez (Institute of Environmental Studies and Integrated
(Deltares)                                                      Research on Disaster Risk, International Center of
                                                                Excellence, National University of Colombia); Joern
                                                                Birkmann (Institute of Spatial and Regional Planning,
Contributors                                                    University of Stuttgart, Germany); Maria Netto (Instituto
                                                                Clima e Sociedade, Brazil); Judy Zakreski (International
Chapter 2: Risk Assessment: An Indispensable Tool for           Code Council); Alexandre Huet (International Committee
Resilience
                                                                of the Red Cross); Lino Briguglio (Islands and Small
Akaraseth Puranasamriddhi and Jim Hall (University
                                                                States Institute, University of Malta); Alonso Brenes
of Oxford, United Kingdom); (Deloitte Global); Niranga
                                                                (La Red, Costa Rica); Nancy Hey (Lloyd’s Register
Alahacoon and Giriraj Amarnath (International Water
                                                                Foundation); Milton Von Hesse (Former Minister of
Management Institute); Carol Mweemba (International
                                                                Housing, Construction and Sanitation, Peru); Ruchika
Water Management Institute Consultant, Zambia);
                                                                Drall (Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Leel Randeni (Climate Change Secretariat, Ministry of
                                                                Change, Government of India); Lizeth Abril (National
Environment, Sri Lanka); Akash Shrivastav, Madhurima
                                                                Agency for Disaster Risk Management, Colombia); Safi
Sarkar-Swaisgood, Naina Tanwar, Parvathy Subha,
                                                                Ahsan Rizvi (National Disaster Management Authority,
Prangya Gupta, Rahul Kumar Suman, and Shashwat Avi
                                                                Government of India); Luis Donas (National Emergency
(United Nations Economic and Social Commission for
                                                                Office of Ministry of Interior and Public Security,
Asia and the Pacific)
                                                                Government of Chile); Munjurul Hannan Khan (Nature
Chapter 3. Economic Impacts: Downstream                         Conservation Management, Bangladesh); Michael
Consequences of Infrastructure Failures                         Mullan (Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Akaraseth Puranasamriddhi (University of Oxford, United         Development); Liliana Carreño (Polytechnic University
Kingdom)                                                        of Catalonia, Spain); Alvaro Fonseca (Ramboll); Cecilia
                                                                Nonifili Yuanita Gulö (Resilience Development Initiative);
Chapter 6. Technologies: Harnessing the Full Potential          Lasitha Perera (The Green Guarantee Company);
(Deloitte Global)                                               Suzanne Osment (The Nature Conservancy); Jan Kellet
                                                                (United Nations Development Programme); Helen Ng,
Chapter 7. Financing: Closing the Gap to Capture the
                                                                Jenty Kirsch-Wood, Mathieu Verougstraete (United
Resilience Dividend
                                                                Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction); Sanju
Akaraseth Puranasamriddhi (University of Oxford,
                                                                Deenapanray (Université des Mascareignes, Mauritius);
United Kingdom); Naho Shibuya and Natalia Romero
                                                                Bilal Ayyub (University of Maryland, United States);
(World Bank); Ravi Seethapathy (Executive Chairman,
                                                                Louise Comfort (University of Pittsburgh, United States);
Biosirus Inc. and Technical Expert, CDRI); Thiago Olante
                                                                Timon McPhearson (Urban Systems Lab); Brenden
Casagrande (Ministry of Transport, Brazil)
                                                                Jongman , Jayashree Srinivasan, Leonardo Garrido,
Chapter 9. Nature-based Solutions: Partnering with the          Natalia Romero (World Bank)
Environment
Joanne Li, Carmen Or, Vivian Fu (WWF Hong Kong);
Debmalya Roy Choudhury, Soma Saha, and Anamitra
Anurag Danda (WWF India)




                                                           51
                                                   Acknowledgements
Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI)
Telephone: +91 11 4044 5999       Website: www.cdri.world      Email: biennialreport@cdri.world; info@cdri.world




     Twitter:                          LinkedIn:                                                 YouTube:
     twitter.com/cdri_world            Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure           @coalitionfordri




                                                                                                    GIR 2025
                                                                                                Executive Summary
This Work is a product of the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure
(CDRI) as part of the second Global Infrastructure Resilience report (GIR 2025)
and features external contributions from multiple organizations. The full report
and the executive summary may be accessed at https://cdri.world/resilience-
dividend/global-infrastructure-resilience-report-second-edition/. All working
papers prepared for this report (GIR 2025 Working Paper Series) are available
on CDRI’s official website, accessible on the web link mentioned above. They
provide detailed background material, methodologies, analyses, and case
                                                                                                 GIR 2025 Report
studies for each chapter of the report. The papers will be released sequentially
starting November 2025 through 2026.


An online data platform enabling visualization, analyses, and downloading
provisions for the results of the Global Infrastructure Risk Model and Resilience
Index (GIRI) is available at https://cdri.world/giri. Updates incorporating the
GIRI 2025 results will be available on this platform in early 2026.




This document is a launch edition and may undergo minor changes in design.
