                                                     Advanced Data Center
                                                     Energy Opportunities:
                                                     Cloud and Infrastructure CoP—
                                                     Data Center Energy and
                                                     Efficiency With AI Adoption
                                                     Otto Van Geet, PE
                                                     National Renewable Energy Laboratory
                                                     September 3, 2025

This presentation was produced when the laboratory
operated as the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory (NREL). The laboratory is now the
National Laboratory of the Rockies (NLR).
     Photo from Getty-181828180
                                                Data Center Energy Demand
A recent Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) study, incorporating changes observed in the data center
sector in recent years, indicates “that the electricity consumption of U.S. data centers is currently growing at an
accelerating rate” (Shehabi et al. 2024).
                                                                                                 Figure ES-1 from the LBNL data center energy use report shows a
                                                                                                 compound annual growth rate of approximately 13% to 27%
                                                                                                 between 2023 and 2028 (from approximately 200 TWh to a range
                                                                                                 of 325 TWh to 580 TWh. Note: This surge in demand should be
                                                                                                 understood within the context of a much larger electricity demand
                                                                                                 expected from other factors (e.g., increase in electric vehicle
                                                                                                 adoption). The report provides details on energy use by data center
                                                                                                 type and industry trends.




 Source: Shehabi, A., S. J. Smith, A. Hubbard, A. Newkirk, N. Lei, M. A. B. Siddik, B. Holecek, J. Koomey, E. Masanet, and D. Sartor. 2024. 2024 United States Data Center Energy Usage Report.
 Berkeley, CA: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. LBNL-2001637. doi.org/10.71468/P1WC7Q.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  NREL | 2
Source: Roberts, B. 2025. Data Center Infrastructure in the United States, 2025 (map). docs.nrel.gov/docs/gen/fy25/94502.jpg.
            Follow Recommendations in Best Practices Guide
            for Energy-Efficient Data Center Design, ASHRAE




                                                                                             Source: ASHRAE. 2025. “Data Center Resource Page.” https://www.ashrae.org/technical-
                                                                                                                     resources/bookstore/datacom-series.
                                                                                           (TC 9.9 Datacom Encyclopedia subscription includes access to PDFs of all prior TC 9.9 books.)



Source: DOE. 2025. “Best Practices Guide for Energy-Efficient Data Center Design.” FEMP.
                                                                                                                                                                                           NREL | 4
www.energy.gov/femp/articles/best-practices-guide-energy-efficient-data-center-design
      Isolate Cold and Hot Aisles

95º–105ºF vs. 60º–70ºF




                             70º–80ºF vs. 45º–55ºF

             Source: www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2013/10/f3/eedatacenterbestpractices.pdf




                                                                                                NREL | 5
                               Increasing CPU Power
                         Transition to Warm Water Cooling



                                                                                                             *Source: ASHRAE. 2021. Thermal Guidelines for Data Processing
                                                                                                             Environments.




Air cooling versus liquid cooling, transitions, and temperatures.
Source: Figure 4 from ASHRAE 2021 white paper “Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers,”                                                   NREL | 6
tpc.ashrae.org/Documents?cmtKey=fd4a4ee6-96a3-4f61-8b85-43418dfa988d.
                                                                            Data Center Metrics
Data Center Metrics: The Green Grid PUE “Family”

Energy:
                 "𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒"+"𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒"              "𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒"
      𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 =                                                               =
                                   "𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒"                               "𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒"

                                               "𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 (𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓,𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐)"
                   𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 =
                                    𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 "𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪 𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄𝒄 (𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶, 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚, 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠)"


                   𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 = 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 𝑥𝑥 𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼
                 "𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒"+"𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒" − "𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹 𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆𝒆"
      𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 =
                                                 "𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒"


Sustainability (water):
                   "𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤 𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢                         𝐿𝐿
      𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊 =                                                            𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢
                               "𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒"                                     𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘

                                             "𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤 𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢" + "𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤 𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢"
                   𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝐸𝐸𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 =
                                                                                           "𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒"




Utilization (based on industry):
       𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺, 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤                                                                                                   NREL | 7
                  Fanless Direct-Liquid-Cooled Server Options
                                        Data Center Metrics: PUE “Family”
       Cold Plates
                                        Energy
                                                        "𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒"+"𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒"              "𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒"
                                             𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 =                                                               =
                                                                          "𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒"                               "𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒"

                                                                                                       "𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒"
                                                         I𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 = 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 "𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜"

                                                         𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 = 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 𝑥𝑥 𝐼𝐼𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇

                                       Direct Immersion




                                             Single Phase                                                       Two Phase
                                                                                                         Image from Liquid Stack
Images from HPE
                                                                                                                                                     NREL | 8
    Advanced Liquid Cooling
                                                                               Production Liquid Cooling                                                Modular Data Center Design
    Enabling Heat Reuse                                                                                                                                     Expanded from 2.5, 5 and 7.5 MW
                                                                                                                                                            Upgrades while systems are in production. Controls augmentation, lessons learned
      NREL has been directly involved in a number of independent
      tests of new cold plates, immersion and was awarded the
      testing and evaluation funding for the ARPA-E COOLERCHIPS
      program.
                                                                                                                                                        Energy Measurements
                                                                               Three generations of HPC systems: Generation 1 was prototype
                                                                               hardware, generation 2 added hybrid cooling, and generation 3
                                                                               extreme high density all DLC.

                                                                               Decade of lessons learned:
                                                                               •    Production liquid cooling                                                Measuring computing energy/carbon intensity for user visibility, forecasting,
                                                                               •    Recommissioning                                                          and system cross-comparison:
•   CHIP-level thermal resistance: ACO, Georgia Tech, and APEEM group          •    Live upgrades.
                                                                                                                                                             •     Workload profiling across different application types
    collaborating to measure thermal resistance at the chip level
                                                                                                                                                             •     Accounting standardization for carbon intensity accounting.
•   Server-level efficiency measurement: Developing testing protocols for
    measuring server-level efficiency, providing guidance to measure iTUE      Data Center Modeling
•   Data center-scale effects based on server measurement: Scale up
    from detailed server testing to macro effects on data center efficiency.
                                                                               Developing integrated co-simulation software: Optimize design of         Water Usage
                                                                               data centers including their data, power, and thermal management
                                                                               systems for lowering cooling energy demand, lowering CO2 footprint,
                                                                               and lowering cost while maintaining reliability and availability.

                                                                               To facilitate the adoption of the tool to achieve transformational and
                                                                               disruptive design advances first for COOLERCHIPS and then by the
                                                                               larger data center design community.


                                                                                                                                                        •        Water usage: Direct reduction in water usage through application of advanced
                                                                                                                                                                 dry coolers (Sandia National Labs and Johnson Controls)

                                                                                                                                                        •        Heat reuse: Comparing and contrasting methods for carbon intensity
                                                                                                                                                                 accounting across industry and public sector.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NREL | 9
     NREL’s Key Approach to Optimize Data Centers

1.   Power usage effectiveness (PUE): Reduce energy use by making systems as efficient
     as possible:
     – Maximize compute entering temperature to maximize energy efficiency!
     – “Free” cooling to reduce or eliminate compressor (chiller, DX)-based cooling:
         a)   Install direct liquid-cooled computers that use warm water.
         b)   Capture as much heat as possible directly to the liquid cooling system.
   – Optimize fan/pump speeds and uninterruptible power supply.
2. Energy reuse effectiveness (ERE): Heat reuse—achieve as low an ERE as possible:
   – Maximize compute leaving temperature to maximize energy reuse!
3. Water usage effectiveness (WUE): Reject as much remaining heat to dry coolers as
   possible:
   – Maximize compute leaving temperature to maximize heat-rejected dry!
                                                                                        NREL | 10
                                                                          Questions?
                                                                          www.nrel.gov

                                                                          NLR/PR-6A40-96792




This work was authored by NREL for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), operated under Contract No.
DE-AC36-08GO28308. Funding provided by U.S. Department of Energy Office of Federal Energy
Management Program. The views expressed in the article do not necessarily represent the views of the
DOE or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for
publication, acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable,
worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this work, or allow others to do so, for
U.S. Government purposes.
