NATIONAL
STRATEGY FOR
THE ARCTIC
REGION
OCTOBER 2022




        NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE ARCTIC REGION   1
Table of Contents
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................................ 3

Introduction: Our Vision for the Arctic .......................................................................................... 5

Changing Conditions in the Arctic ................................................................................................. 5

Our Approach: Strategic Pillars and Guiding Principles ................................................................ 7

Pillar 1—Security: Develop Capabilities for Expanded Arctic Activity ........................................ 8

Pillar 2—Climate Change and Environmental Protection: Build Resilience and Advance
Adaptation, while Mitigating Emissions....................................................................................... 10

Pillar 3—Sustainable Economic Development: Improve Livelihoods and Expand Economic
Opportunity ................................................................................................................................... 11

Pillar 4—International Cooperation and Governance: Sustain Arctic Institutions and Uphold
International Law .......................................................................................................................... 13

The Way Forward ......................................................................................................................... 14




2                      NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE ARCTIC REGION
Executive Summary
The United States seeks an Arctic region that is peaceful, stable, prosperous, and cooperative.
The National Strategy for the Arctic Region articulates an affirmative U.S. agenda over the next
ten years, from 2022 to 2032, to realize this vision. This strategy, an update of its 2013
predecessor, addresses the climate crisis with greater urgency and directs new investments in
sustainable development to improve livelihoods for Arctic residents, while conserving the
environment. It also acknowledges increasing strategic competition in the Arctic since 2013,
exacerbated by Russia’s unprovoked war in Ukraine, and seeks to position the United States to
both effectively compete and manage tensions.
Realizing our vision during this dynamic and challenging period will require U.S. leadership at
home and abroad. We will advance U.S. interests across four mutually reinforcing pillars
spanning both domestic and international issues.
   •   Pillar 1—Security: We will deter threats to the U.S. homeland and our allies by
       enhancing the capabilities required to defend our interests in the Arctic, while
       coordinating shared approaches with allies and partners and mitigating risks of
       unintended escalation. We will exercise U.S. government presence in the Arctic region as
       required to protect the American people and defend our sovereign territory.
   •   Pillar 2—Climate Change and Environmental Protection: The U.S. government will
       partner with Alaskan communities and the State of Alaska to build resilience to the
       impacts of climate change, while working to reduce emissions from the Arctic as part of
       broader global mitigation efforts, to improve scientific understanding, and to conserve
       Arctic ecosystems.
   •   Pillar 3—Sustainable Economic Development: We will pursue sustainable
       development and improve livelihoods in Alaska, including for Alaska Native
       communities, by investing in infrastructure, improving access to services, and supporting
       growing economic sectors. We will also work with allies and partners to expand high-
       standard investment and sustainable development across the Arctic region.
   •   Pillar 4—International Cooperation and Governance: Despite the challenges to Arctic
       cooperation resulting from Russia’s aggression in Ukraine, the United States will work to
       sustain institutions for Arctic cooperation, including the Arctic Council, and position
       these institutions to manage the impacts of increasing activity in the region. We also seek
       to uphold international law, rules, norms, and standards in the Arctic.
This strategy is intended to serve as a framework to guide the U.S. government’s approach to
tackling emerging challenges and opportunities in the Arctic. Our work will be guided by
five principles that will be applied across all four pillars.
   •   Consult, Coordinate, and Co-Manage with Alaska Native Tribes and Communities:
       The United States is committed to regular, meaningful, and robust consultation,
       coordination, and co-management with Alaska Native Tribes, communities, corporations,
       and other organizations and to ensuring equitable inclusion of Indigenous Peoples and
       their knowledge.



               NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE ARCTIC REGION                                             3
    •   Deepen Relationships with Allies and Partners: We will deepen our cooperation with
        Arctic Allies and partners: Canada, the Kingdom of Denmark (including Greenland),
        Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden. We will also expand Arctic cooperation with
        other countries that uphold international law, rules, norms, and standards in the region.
    •   Plan for Long-Lead Time Investments: Many of the investments prioritized in this
        strategy will require long lead times. We will be proactive, anticipating changes coming
        to the Arctic over the next several decades and making new investments now to be
        prepared.
    •   Cultivate Cross-Sectoral Coalitions and Innovative Ideas: The challenges and
        opportunities in the Arctic cannot be solved by national governments alone. The United
        States will strengthen and build on coalitions of private sector; academia; civil society;
        and state, local, and Tribal actors to encourage and harness innovative ideas to tackle
        these challenges.
    •   Commit to a Whole of Government, Evidence-Based Approach: The Arctic extends
        beyond the responsibility of any single region or government agency. U.S. Federal
        departments and agencies will work together to implement this strategy. We will deploy
        evidence-based decision-making and carry out our work in close partnership with the
        State of Alaska; Alaska Native Tribes, communities, corporations, and other
        organizations; and local communities, as well as with the U.S. Congress.




4               NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE ARCTIC REGION
Introduction: Our Vision for the Arctic
The Arctic—home to more than four million people, extensive natural resources, and unique
ecosystems—is undergoing a dramatic transformation. Driven by climate change, this
transformation will challenge livelihoods in the Arctic, will create new economic opportunities,
and could intensify strategic competition among countries. Alaska makes the United States an
Arctic nation, which instills authority and responsibility for the stewardship and protection of
this region, especially during this period of change.
Despite current tensions stemming from Russia’s unprovoked, full-scale invasion of Ukraine, the
United States seeks an Arctic region that is peaceful, stable, prosperous, and cooperative. A
peaceful Arctic will have guardrails to manage competition and resolve disputes without force or
coercion. Stability results from countries acting responsibly and in accordance with international
law, rules, norms, and standards, including freedom of navigation. A prosperous Arctic features
healthy and vibrant Arctic communities and sustainable economic growth. We aim to secure
these objectives in the U.S. Arctic and throughout the region, working primarily with our allies
and partners to solve shared challenges. Russia’s unprovoked war of aggression against Ukraine
has rendered government-to-government cooperation with Russia in the Arctic virtually
impossible. Over the coming decade, it may be possible to resume cooperation under certain
conditions. Russia’s continued aggression makes most cooperation unlikely for the foreseeable
future.
Our vision for the Arctic protects and advances U.S. interests in the region, including providing
for homeland security and defense; mitigating and building resilience to climate change and
ecosystem degradation; expanding U.S. economic opportunities; protecting and improving
livelihoods, including for Alaska Native communities; and upholding international law, rules,
norms, and standards across Arctic countries.
This National Strategy for the Arctic Region updates its 2013 predecessor and builds on
established U.S. Arctic region policy1 to reflect changes to the strategic environment and to set
forth the U.S. government’s approach to realizing this vision. This strategy addresses the climate
crisis with greater urgency and directs new investments in responsible economic development to
improve livelihoods for Arctic residents, while conserving the environment. It also
acknowledges increasing strategic competition in the Arctic since 2013 and seeks to position the
United States to both effectively compete and manage tensions. The strategy articulates an
affirmative U.S. agenda for the Arctic over the next ten years and provides a framework for how
the U.S. government will respond to emerging challenges and opportunities in the region.


Changing Conditions in the Arctic
Climate change in the Arctic—and the resulting diminishing sea ice, thawing permafrost, and ice
sheet degradation—creates a cascade of difficulties, as well as some new possibilities. The
Arctic Council affirmed in 2021 that the Arctic is warming three times faster than the rest of the

1
 National Security Presidential Directive-66/Homeland Security Presidential Directive-25, “Arctic Region Policy,”
January 2009.


                  NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE ARCTIC REGION                                                       5
                                    

world. Climate change is making the Arctic more accessible than ever before, while contributing
to rising global sea levels, coastal erosion, more frequent and severe wildfires, and damaged
ecosystems. These consequences threaten the livelihoods of Arctic residents and the traditional
lifestyles of Alaska Native communities. Changing fish and wildlife migration patterns,
combined with the high cost of non-subsistence foods, have exacerbated food insecurity and
made cultural traditions more difficult to carry on. Coastal erosion, permafrost thaw, and
flooding in Alaska are damaging infrastructure and will force some communities to relocate or
invest heavily in infrastructure resilience.
A more accessible Arctic could also create new economic opportunities. Low population
densities over a vast geography, high cost of doing business, and lack of financial resources have
contributed to long-standing challenges, including limited infrastructure and a reliance on the oil
and gas and commercial fishing sectors. These constraints have, in turn, kept cost of living high
and stifled opportunities to develop other industries. Diminishing sea ice is gradually opening
new shipping routes and could spur economic development. The Arctic’s significant deposits of
in-demand minerals essential to key technology supply chains have piqued the interest of
governments and businesses across the world. As ice in the Arctic Ocean diminishes and as fish
migration patterns shift, commercial fisheries may move into new areas. These changes could
generate economic benefits for Arctic residents if appropriately managed, in consultation with
those populations. New opportunities will also bring additional challenges, from the potential for
new illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing and greater environmental degradation to risks
to maritime navigation, a greater likelihood of accidents, and changes to traditional lifestyles.
The Arctic’s growing strategic importance has intensified competition to shape its future as
countries pursue new economic interests and prepare for increased activity. Russia has invested
significantly in its military presence in the Arctic over the last decade. It is modernizing its
military bases and airfields; deploying new coastal and air defense missile systems and upgraded
submarines; and increasing military exercises and training operations with a new combatant-
command-equivalent for the Arctic. Russia is also developing new economic infrastructure in its
Arctic territories to develop hydrocarbons, minerals, and fisheries and is attempting to constrain
freedom of navigation through its excessive maritime claims along the Northern Sea Route.
Russia’s war in Ukraine has raised geopolitical tensions in the Arctic, as it has globally, creating
new risks of unintended conflict and hindering cooperation. The war has focused Russian
military attention on Ukraine, and sanctions levied against Russia following its invasion could
complicate Russia’s Arctic economic development and military modernization efforts. Russia’s
war in Ukraine redoubled NATO’s unity and resolve and spurred efforts to expand NATO
resourcing. It has also enhanced unity with our Arctic partners, as evidenced by Finland and
Sweden’s prospective NATO accession.
The People’s Republic of China (PRC) seeks to increase its influence in the Arctic through an
expanded slate of economic, diplomatic, scientific, and military activities. It has also emphasized
its intention to play a larger role in shaping regional governance. Over the last decade, the PRC
has doubled its investments, with a focus on critical mineral extraction; expanded its scientific
activities; and used these scientific engagements to conduct dual-use research with intelligence
or military applications in the Arctic. The PRC has expanded its icebreaker fleet and sent naval
vessels into the Arctic for the first time. Other non-Arctic countries have also increased their
presence, investments, and activities in the Arctic.



6               NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE ARCTIC REGION
                                    

Our Approach: Strategic Pillars and Guiding
Principles
Realizing our vision of a peaceful, stable, prosperous, and cooperative Arctic during this
dynamic and challenging period will require U.S. leadership at home and abroad. We will
advance U.S. interests across four mutually reinforcing pillars spanning both domestic and
international issues. Many of the investments we undertake in the U.S. Arctic will benefit not
only residents in Alaska, but also our ability to pursue economic and environmental opportunities
and project influence and security across the region. Together, these pillars guide the
United States’ affirmative agenda in the Arctic region for the next decade.
   •   Pillar 1—Security: We will deter threats to the U.S. homeland and our allies by
       enhancing the capabilities required to defend our interests in the Arctic, while
       coordinating shared approaches with allies and partners and mitigating risks of
       unintended escalation. We will exercise U.S. Government presence in the Arctic region
       as required to protect the American people and defend our sovereign territory.
   •   Pillar 2—Climate Change and Environmental Protection: The U.S. Government will
       partner with Alaskan communities and the State of Alaska to build resilience to the
       impacts of climate change, while working to reduce emissions from the Arctic as part of
       broader global mitigation efforts, to improve scientific understanding of climate change,
       and to conserve Arctic ecosystems.
   •   Pillar 3—Sustainable Economic Development: We will pursue sustainable
       development and improve livelihoods in Alaska, including for Alaska Native
       communities, by investing in infrastructure, improved access to services, and support for
       growing economic sectors. We will also work with allies and partners to expand high-
       standard investment and sustainable development across the Arctic region.
   •   Pillar 4—International Cooperation and Governance: Despite the challenges to Arctic
       cooperation resulting from Russia’s aggression in Ukraine, the United States will work to
       sustain institutions for Arctic cooperation, including the Arctic Council, and position
       these institutions to manage the impacts of increasing activity in the region. The United
       States will also work with Arctic Allies and partners to pursue a common approach to
       advance shared interests and to uphold international law in the region.
This strategy is intended to serve as a framework to guide the U.S. Government’s approach to
confronting the new challenges and opportunities in the Arctic. As we turn this strategy into a
reality, our work will be guided by five principles, which we will apply across all four pillars.
   •   Consult, Coordinate, and Co-Manage with Alaska Native Tribes and Communities:
       The United States is committed to regular, meaningful, and robust consultation,
       coordination, and, as appropriate, co-management with Alaska Native Tribes,
       communities, corporations, and other organizations—both to ensure Alaska Native
       communities are partners in decisions affecting them and also because we recognize that
       Alaska Native experience and knowledge is essential to the success of this strategy. We
       will support an equitable partnership, including by integrating co-production of



                NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE ARCTIC REGION                                             7
                                    

        knowledge and Indigenous Knowledge into federal processes and by supporting Tribal
        self-determination and opportunity.
    •   Deepen Relationships with Allies and Partners: The Arctic is home to some of the
        United States’ closest allies and partners. Our North American neighbor and Ally,
        Canada and our European Allies and partners, the Kingdom of Denmark (including
        Greenland), Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden are essential counterparts in realizing
        our shared vision for the Arctic. We will continue to deepen our cooperation and improve
        interoperability and information-sharing. We will also expand Arctic cooperation with
        other countries that uphold international law, rules, norms, and standards in the region.
    •   Plan for Long-Lead Time Investments: Many of the investments prioritized in this
        strategy will require long lead times. We will be proactive, anticipating changes coming
        to the Arctic over the next several decades and making new investments now to be
        prepared. Among other investments, we will procure additional icebreakers, enhance
        communications and maritime transportation infrastructure, support communities to build
        climate resilience, and invest in scientific research.
    •   Cultivate Cross-Sectoral Coalitions and Innovative Ideas: The challenges and
        opportunities in the Arctic cannot be solved by national governments alone. The United
        States will strengthen and build on coalitions of private sector; academia; civil society;
        and state, local, and Tribal actors to encourage and harness innovative ideas to tackle
        these challenges. We will capitalize on institutions, such as the Ted Stevens Center for
        Arctic Security Studies, to build strong networks of domestic and international leaders to
        advance expertise and cooperation in the Arctic. We will also work with stakeholders
        across the Arctic to facilitate economic, environmental, and cultural linkages.
    •   Commit to a Whole-of-Government, Evidence-Based Approach: The Arctic region
        extends beyond the responsibility of any single region or government agency. U.S.
        Federal departments and agencies will work together, through coordinating bodies like
        the Arctic Executive Steering Committee and the National Security Council, to provide
        the resources, support, and expertise required to implement this strategy. We will deploy
        evidence-based decision-making and carry out our work in close partnership with the
        State of Alaska; Alaska Native Tribes, corporations, and other organizations; and local
        communities, as well as with the U.S. Congress.


Pillar 1—Security: Develop Capabilities for
Expanded Arctic Activity
Our highest priority is to protect the American people and our sovereign territory and rights. We
are committed to the security of our treaty allies and to supporting our partners in the region. Our
security in the Arctic is inclusive of many interests, from national defense and homeland security
to safe commercial and scientific activities. However, the Arctic environment poses region-
specific challenges that require tailored technology, assets, infrastructure, training, and planning.
To secure our interests as attention, investments, and activity grow in the Arctic over the coming
decades, the United States will enhance and exercise both our military and civilian capabilities in
the Arctic as required to deter threats and to anticipate, prevent, and respond to both natural and


8               NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE ARCTIC REGION
                                   

human-made incidents. We will improve our understanding of the Arctic environment and
develop whole-of-government capabilities to support expanding activity in the U.S. Arctic
region. We will deepen cooperation with Arctic Allies and partners in support of these objectives
and to manage risks of further militarization or unintended conflict, including those resulting
from geopolitical tensions with Russia. These improvements will contribute to both national
security and safety and livelihoods in the State of Alaska.

Strategic Objective 1.1: Improve Our Understanding of the Arctic Operating Environment
A deeper understanding of the Arctic operating environment is needed to inform real-time
decision-making and respond to changing conditions. We will invest in modernized domain
awareness to detect and track potential airborne and maritime threats and improve sensing and
observational capabilities, including for sea ice, ship traffic, and weather. For example, we will
collaborate with Canada on North American Aerospace Defense Command modernization. We
will support expanded observations, modeling, and analytic capabilities to enhance our ability to
use gathered data to predict the changing operational environment. We will also improve
communications and positioning, navigation, and timing capabilities by developing
communications and data networks capable of operating in the northern latitudes. We will work
to improve Arctic observing, mapping, and charting; weather, water, and sea ice forecasting;
subseasonal and seasonal prediction; emergency preparedness posture; and satellite coverage to
enable efficient commerce and to ensure maritime and air safety.

Strategic Objective 1.2: Exercise Presence to Support Priority Goals
The United States will maintain and, as driven by requirements, refine and advance military
presence in the Arctic in support of our homeland defense, global military and power projection,
and deterrence goals. We will continue to conduct regular, transparent, and consistent training,
exercises, and episodic deployments with our allies and partners, as well as independently. We
will enhance homeland security through measures such as effective maritime security, law
enforcement, search and rescue, and emergency response. This includes expanding the U.S.
Coast Guard icebreaker fleet to support persistent presence in the U.S. Arctic and additional
presence as needed in the European Arctic. We will make targeted investments to strategically
enhance security infrastructure as required to enable these aims, while building the resilience of
critical infrastructure to protect against both climate change and cyberattacks.

Strategic Objective 1.3: Maximize Unity of Effort with Allies and Partners
We will maximize our cooperation with Arctic Allies and partners to enhance our shared security
and deter aggression in the Arctic, especially from Russia. We will coordinate closely with our
allies and partners to deepen our understanding of Arctic security challenges, improve our
collective deterrent and ability to respond to contingencies, and jointly develop and lead shared
approaches to address security challenges together, including through expanded information
sharing in the region. To improve operational familiarity with the Arctic region, including cold
weather operations and interoperability, we will increase our focus on combined exercises and
training. We will undertake calibrated and coordinated activities with NATO Allies and Arctic
partners with the aim of both defending NATO’s security interests in the region while also
reducing risks and preventing unintended escalation, especially during this period of heightened
tension with Russia. We will also continue to partner with the State of Alaska and Alaska Native
and rural communities on activities such as combined exercises and training on cold weather
operations and interoperability.


                NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE ARCTIC REGION                                          9
                                         

Pillar 2—Climate Change and
Environmental Protection: Build Resilience
and Advance Adaptation, while Mitigating
Emissions
Climate change generates greater impacts in the Arctic than in many more temperate regions,
yielding unstable terrain, vulnerable coasts, changing ecosystems, and a worsening biodiversity
crisis. More than 60 percent of Alaska Native communities are considered environmentally
threatened2 due to climate change. Historically, these communities have faced barriers to
accessing federal resources. We will support efforts to build Alaskan communities’ resilience in
the face of dramatic changes on the Arctic’s horizon. We will also reduce emissions of
greenhouse gases from the Arctic as part of global mitigation efforts, invest in scientific research,
and protect and conserve Arctic ecosystems. In so doing, we will partner with Alaska Native
Tribes, communities, corporations, and other organizations; the State of Alaska; and public,
private, academic and non-governmental sectors at home and abroad to harness the full range of
knowledge and resources required to meet these goals.

Strategic Objective 2.1: Advance Community Adaptation and Climate Resilience
Climate change is forcing some Alaskan communities to relocate entirely, move multiple
buildings and homes, or protect vulnerable infrastructure while remaining in place. Communities
also face other climate challenges, including adverse impacts on food security due to changes in
the availability of and access to subsistence resources and increased vulnerability to drought and
wildfires. We will support communities as they face these challenges, providing data and
financial and technical assistance to enable community adaptation and resilience planning. We
will collaborate with Alaska Native communities to determine preferred solutions for these and
other climate challenges, and we will coordinate across federal, state, and local agencies to
define dedicated roles and responsibilities to deliver whole-of-government support.

Strategic Objective 2.2: Pursue International Initiatives to Mitigate Emissions in the Arctic
The United States will work to reduce localized emissions of carbon dioxide, methane, and black
carbon, through both existing and new bilateral and multilateral initiatives as appropriate to
complement our global mitigation efforts. Mitigation should also include protection of habitats
that store carbon, such as forests, tundra, and coastal marshes.

Strategic Objective 2.3: Expand Research to Better Understand Climate Change and
Inform Policy Decisions
It is essential to better understand the ways the Arctic environment is rapidly changing, to
anticipate future changes, and to understand the Arctic’s impact on climate change globally and
extreme events regionally. The United States will advance our monitoring and predictive
capacity with better data collection and integration, new observational tools and data, and

2
 “Environmentally threatened” communities are defined by the Denali Commission’s Village Infrastructure
Protection program as communities experiencing significant impacts to infrastructure from erosion, flooding, and/or
permafrost degradation.


10                NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE ARCTIC REGION
                                      

improved regional and global climate models. We will also support research on marine
ecosystems, wildlife, and fisheries; the design and construction of Arctic infrastructure; and
health crises afflicting Arctic populations. To support science-based decisions, we will also
explore research to improve our understanding of issues such as the potential emissions and
health threats resulting from permafrost thaw. International scientific partnerships and
co-production of knowledge with Alaska Native communities will have a multiplier effect on
this research. Coordinated research on the environmental and societal impacts of climate change
in the Arctic and the Arctic’s role in global climate dynamics should be guided by the
Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee’s (IARPC) and the U.S. Arctic Research
Commission’s (USARC) research plans.3

Strategic Objective 2.4: Conserve and Protect Arctic Ecosystems, including through
Indigenous Co-Production and Co-Management
The United States must continue to pursue multilateral initiatives and research to conserve and
protect Arctic biodiversity, ecosystems, habitats, and wildlife, expanding on concepts like the
Northern Bering Sea Climate Resilience Area.4 Conservation in the Arctic is consistent with the
America the Beautiful Initiative5, which sets out our national goal of conserving 30 percent of
America’s lands and waters by 2030, as well as our international commitments to conservation
and climate. We will work to preserve essential habitats, halt biodiversity loss, and manage
natural resources using an ecosystems-based approach. We will accelerate work to clean up
contaminated lands in Alaska. We will also explore nature-based solutions to reduce flood and
erosion risk, increase ecosystem resilience, store carbon, and deliver co-benefits such as habitat
protection. To carry out this work, we will support co-production of knowledge to develop, as
appropriate, co-managed conservation initiatives. We will ensure we have the capabilities
required to prepare for, prevent, and respond to oil spills and other environmental disasters in the
Arctic and to reduce harmful pollutants and improve waste and water management.


Pillar 3—Sustainable Economic
Development: Improve Livelihoods and
Expand Economic Opportunity
While diminishing sea ice is a stark indicator of accelerating climate change, it will offer
increased accessibility in the Arctic and could create new economic opportunities. We will
pursue these potential opportunities, while also protecting the environment. We will work closely
with allies and partners to support high-standard investment and sustainable development across
the region. The U.S. government will help create the conditions to catalyze responsible,
inclusive, and transparent economic development in Alaska and across the Arctic. In particular,
we will invest in infrastructure, improve access to services, and support the development of
industries that expand economic opportunity for local communities, support the energy

3
  IARPC, “Arctic Research Plan 2022–2026,” December 2021; USARC, “Report on the Goals and Objectives for
Arctic Research 2019-2020,” May 2019.
4
  Executive Order 13754, “Northern Bering Sea Climate Resilience,” December 9, 2016.
5
  “Report: Conserving and Restoring America the Beautiful,” May 2021.


                 NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE ARCTIC REGION                                                   11
                                  

transition, and build the resilience of U.S. supply chains. We will carry out this work without
compromising sensitive Arctic ecosystems and in partnership with Indigenous and local
communities. We recognize that the Alaskan economy, like the economies of several other areas
in the Arctic, still depends heavily on revenue from hydrocarbon development. We will work
with the State of Alaska to support efforts to diversify its economy; create a just energy
transition, including for impacted workers; and ensure energy security and affordability during
this transition. We will make inclusive economic growth a priority and work to improve
livelihoods in Alaska, including for Alaska Native communities.

Strategic Objective 3.1: Invest in Infrastructure
In 2021, the United States enacted the largest investment in physical infrastructure in nearly a
century, including historic investments in transportation, broadband, clean water, energy
infrastructure, and resilience. These investments will boost economic capacity and productivity
and support millions of jobs and trillions of dollars in economic activity over the next decade,
including in Alaska. We will support development of much-needed infrastructure in Alaska that
serves responsible development, food security, stable housing, climate resilience, and national
defense needs as driven by requirements. In particular, we will invest in advanced
telecommunications infrastructure in Alaska, including broadband and 5G for Alaska Native and
rural communities, recognizing this technology will serve as a platform for a range of needs,
from the expansion of the knowledge economy to remote education and telemedicine. We will
support development of a deep draft harbor in Nome, as well as development of smaller ports,
airfields, and other infrastructure, in consultation with the State of Alaska and Alaska Native
communities, to tackle the high cost of living, facilitate responsible development, and improve
incident response and recovery while minimizing impacts to the surrounding environment and
local communities. As we pursue these infrastructure investments, we will explore opportunities
to leverage public-private partnerships and innovative financing mechanisms. We will seek
multiplier effects through investments that benefit Alaskan communities while also enabling the
United States to project presence and influence across the region. We will work with Arctic
Allies and partners to protect critical infrastructure and improve investment screening for
national security purposes.

Strategic Objective 3.2: Improve Access to Services and Protect Subsistence Lifestyles and
Cultural Traditions
In pursuing sustainable development that is equitable and aligned with Alaska Native
communities’ needs, we will protect subsistence lifestyles and improve access to reliable and
affordable services, including healthcare, education, energy, housing, water and sanitation, and
public safety. We will renew efforts to provide climate-resilient water and sanitation
infrastructure for the 31 Alaska Native communities still without dependable in-home running
water. We will also work to improve access to affordable energy by developing renewable
energy generation, storage, transmission, and distribution. We will explore opportunities to
expand Indigenous cooperative and co-management agreements and to fight the epidemic of
missing and murdered Indigenous peoples. Indigenous Knowledge will inform decisions about
Alaska’s fish and wildlife resources and help navigate the threats posed to Alaska’s subsistence
lifestyles.




12             NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE ARCTIC REGION
                                   

Strategic Objective 3.3: Develop Emerging Economic Sectors in Alaska
U.S. Government agencies will expand support for sustainable development of renewable
energy, critical minerals production, tourism, and knowledge economy sectors in Alaska with the
aim of creating sustainable growth and well-paying jobs in Alaska and responsibly developing
alternative industries in Alaska to support a just energy transition, while protecting biodiversity
and promoting co-ocean use. We will explore new programs to catalyze private sector
investment in Alaska. We will seek to strengthen the resilience of U.S. supply chains by
exploring the potential for sustainable and responsible critical mineral production in Alaska
while adhering to the highest environmental, labor, community engagement, and sustainability
standards. Development efforts will be carried out in partnership with the private sector; State of
Alaska; Alaska Native communities; and stakeholders, including representatives of labor,
impacted communities, and environmental justice leaders, and will be accompanied by
assessments of their associated environmental impacts.

Strategic Objective 3.4: Work with Allies and Partners to Increase Responsible Arctic
Investment, including in Critical Minerals
In the broader Arctic region, we will work with our allies and partners—including through the
potential use of relevant U.S. Government mechanisms and development programs, such as the
Export-Import Bank, U.S. International Development Finance Corporation, and U.S. Trade and
Development Agency—to expand private sector-led investment and pursue sustainable economic
development in the Arctic, including in critical minerals. We will explore methods to enable
enhanced U.S. government support for strategic investments and to incentivize private sector
investment in the Arctic. We will strengthen capacity across the Arctic region to screen
prospective investments based on national security, environmental sustainability, and supply
chain resilience concerns. Across our development efforts, we will continue to employ the best
practices that distinguish the United States and our partners from our competitors: transparency
and accountability; high environmental, labor, community engagement, and sustainability
standards; equity and ethics; and local partnerships supported by sound, sustainable financing.


Pillar 4—International Cooperation and
Governance: Sustain Arctic Institutions and
Uphold International Law
The United States seeks to uphold international law, rules, norms, and standards; close potential
gaps in governance; preserve freedom of navigation; and protect U.S. sovereign rights, including
with respect to the extended continental shelf. The United States values the unique spirit of
international cooperation that has generally characterized the Arctic since the end of the Cold
War. Russia’s brutal war in Ukraine has made this cooperation in the Arctic virtually impossible
in the Arctic at present. However, maintaining cooperation with our allies and partners in the
near-term remains essential to advancing our objectives for the region. Over the past quarter
century, the United States has been integral to the development of the governance architecture
enabling this regional cooperation. The United States helped create the Arctic Council and the
Arctic Coast Guard Forum and chaired negotiations that produced a series of international



                NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE ARCTIC REGION                                         13
                                    

agreements pertaining to the Arctic region, such as the Agreement to Prevent Unregulated High
Seas Fisheries in the Central Arctic Ocean (CAO Fisheries Agreement).
As the Arctic becomes more accessible and as strategic competition intensifies, we will maintain
our leadership role in the Arctic. We will sustain the existing multilateral fora and legal
frameworks dedicated to solving shared challenges in the region, recognizing that Arctic
countries have the primary responsibility for addressing these challenges. While emphasizing
existing frameworks, we will remain open to developing new bilateral and multilateral
partnerships as needed to advance scientific cooperation and other U.S. interests in the Arctic.

Strategic Objective 4.1: Sustain the Arctic Council and Other Arctic Institutions and
Agreements
The United States will seek to maintain the Arctic Council as the principal multilateral forum for
the Arctic by working through the Council whenever possible, in line with broader U.S. policy
on Russia, and making funding for U.S.-led Arctic Council activities more consistent. We will
also work to advance implementation and enforcement of existing international agreements,
including the CAO Fisheries Agreement, the International Maritime Organization’s Polar Code,
and the Agreement on Enhancing International Science Cooperation in the Arctic. For other
Arctic institutions, such as the Arctic Coast Guard Forum and the Forum of Arctic Research
Operators, we will expand U.S. engagement and leadership, pursue new partnerships and
arrangements that advance shared interests, and prepare for increased and evolving activity in the
region, including to manage increased maritime activity, promote sustainable economic
development, and advance conservation and scientific research. We will bring whole-of-
government tools to bear to support this work, including by expanding our diplomatic presence
across the Arctic with additional personnel and posts.
As noted above, Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine has rendered government-to-
government cooperation with Russia in the Arctic virtually impossible at present. Over the
coming decade, the United States recognizes that it may be possible for some cooperation to
resume under certain conditions. In the meantime, we will work with our allies and partners and
other governments that uphold the rule of law to sustain the effectiveness of the Arctic Council
and other Arctic institutions and to hold all members accountable for their responsibility to
uphold international law, rules, and standards globally.

Strategic Objective 4.2: Protect Freedom of Navigation and Continental Shelf Limits
The United States will protect navigation and overflight rights and freedoms across the Arctic
and will delineate the outer limits of the U.S. continental shelf in accordance with international
law as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). We will
also continue to support joining UNCLOS and to vigorously defend U.S. interests, which are
best served by widespread adherence to the international rule of law.


The Way Forward
The Arctic is undergoing transformational change. The Arctic Ocean may see ice-free summers
as soon as 2030, flooding and wildfires will increase in frequency, new economic opportunities
could emerge, and geopolitical tensions may grow. The United States, must therefore prepare for
and shape this transformation by taking action now to manage these challenges and pursue new


14              NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE ARCTIC REGION
                                  

opportunities. This strategy lays out the U.S. approach for doing so. By working together with a
range of partners, including Arctic Allies and partners, the State of Alaska, Alaska Native
communities, local governments, businesses, and universities, we will undertake a whole-of-
government endeavor to realize an Arctic region that is peaceful, stable, prosperous, and
cooperative.




               NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE ARCTIC REGION                                         15
