PORT MACKENZIE: UNLEASHING
ALASKA’S EXTRAORDINARY RESOURCE
POTENTIAL AND INCREASING AMERICAN
MINERAL PRODUCTION
Ria Hanson, Ted Stevens Center for Arctic Security Studies


19 Sept 2025



Resource development in Alaska, the United States’ portion of the Arctic, is slowed by
insufficient transportation and export capacity. The region’s energy, mineral, and maritime
assets are of growing strategic importance, but development is hindered by inaccessibility.
Recent executive orders by President Trump, particularly the January 20, 2025 Executive Order
14153, “Unleashing Alaska’s Extraordinary Resource Potential” (EO14153), and March 20, 2025
Executive Order 14241, “Immediate Measures to Increase American Mineral Production” (EO
14241), highlight the national imperative of advancing Arctic resource projects and improving
associated infrastructure. i Among the most critical investments to achieve these
objectives is the completion of the Port MacKenzie rail extension and the expansion of the
port itself. These projects would provide reliable, year-round access for resource extraction,
reduce logistical costs, and open efficient pathways to global markets. Advancing the rail
extension and port will not only accelerate economic opportunities for Alaska but also
strengthen U.S. resilience and security in the Arctic domain.

BACKGROUND

Executive Order 14153, “Unleashing Alaska’s Extraordinary Resource Potential,” emphasizes
several objectives related to developing Alaska’s resources “to the fullest extent possible.” ii
These objectives include economic and national security, trade imbalances, global energy, and
energy security in the face of geopolitical conﬂict. To achieve these objectives, the EO calls for
the U.S. to “fully avail itself of Alaska’s vast lands and resources for the beneﬁt of the Nation”
and maximize development and production of natural resources, including Liquiﬁed Natural
Gas (LNG) in the state.

Executive Order 14241, “Immediate Measures to Increase American Mineral Production,”
emphasizes that U.S. economic and national security are “acutely threatened by our reliance
upon hostile foreign power’s mineral production.” iii The EO calls for the U.S. to take action to
facilitate domestic mineral production to the maximum extent possible.

                                                                                 CLEARED
                                                                            For Open Publication
                                                                                Sep 30, 2025

                                                                              Department of Defense
                                                                    OFFICE OF PREPUBLICATION AND SECURITY REVIEW



                                                                                            25-P-1246
A key infrastructure component to achieving the goals of both EOs is the further development of Port
MacKenzie and completion of the Port MacKenzie rail extension. 1

Port MacKenzie is a port in early-stage development. It sits in the Matanuska-Susitna Borough, across Knik Arm
from the Port of Alaska in southcentral Alaska. Port MacKenzie is the only port in the U.S. Arctic with year-round
accessibility and extensive development potential. It has unique characteristics to support resource
development including a deep-draft dock, barge dock, 15 acres of wharf, a conveyor belt, terminal building and
paved access road. iv It is surrounded by 9,000 acres of adjacent land available for commercial and industrial
development or staging. Port MacKenzie can handle the world’s largest bulk cargo vessels, like the ones that
transport commodities through the Panama Canal, around the Cape of Africa and across the Paciﬁc Ocean.

Port MacKenzie also has a partially completed rail extension connecting the port to the Alaska Railroad mainline
and the heavily mineralized areas of Interior Alaska. The estimated cost to complete the rail line is $300 million,
in addition to the $184 million (over $255 million in 2025 dollars) already contributed by the State of Alaska. v This
rail extension must be completed to maximize the economic and national security beneﬁts of Port MacKenzie.

ANALYSIS

With the completion of the rail extension, Port MacKenzie can help achieve the development of Alaska’s
LNG potential.

Section 3. Part (a)(ii) of EO 14153 emphasizes the importance of necessary LNG pipeline infrastructure.
Completion of an LNG pipeline from the North Slope of Alaska will require the transportation of key development
cargo from tidewater to inland locations. This cargo includes pipe, compressor station construction materials,
compressor components, construction equipment, fuel, and construction camps and camp components. One
gallon of fuel can move one ton of freight 130 miles by truck or 480 miles by train, making trucking miles a major
expense relative to rail transport. vi Thus, transportation by rail is the most cost-effective way to transport the
materials needed for LNG pipeline construction. Port MacKenzie, with its ample staging space and a completed
rail extension, could be speciﬁcally used to transport pipe and materials for construction of the northern portion
of the LNG pipeline. The southern end of the pipeline will likely be supported by the Port of Valdez.

Port MacKenzie and the completed rail extension contribute to developing mineral resources in Alaska that
will reduce reliance on foreign mineral production.

The Railbelt corridor has signiﬁcant mineral deposits with development potential, if production is economic. vii
Figure 3 in the Appendix approximates the location of many of these mineral occurrences within a 100km buffer
of the Railbelt. Dr. Paul Metz, a registered professional geologist, completed a two-phase economic analysis of
future rail extension cargo operations. viii His analysis, in combination with information provided by local
entrepreneurs, the Port Director and Borough staff, concluded that completion of the rail extension alongside
increased Port investment would open the corridor along the Railbelt and into Interior Alaska for new exploration
and development. This development could lead to the extraction of strategic minerals including lead, zinc,
copper, molybdenum, lime, silver and antimony. ix

The mineral development that Port MacKenzie and the rail extension could stimulate will directly
contribute to national security.

The Department of Defense uses approximately 750,000 tons of minerals annually. x Many of the mineral deposits
along the Railbelt in Alaska are particularly important to the U.S. military. Lead is a major component of

    1
        See Figures 1 and 2 in the Appendix for map visualizations.
ammunition; copper is used to make military vehicles including aircrafts and ships; copper combined with lead
and nickel is used to make body armor; and molybdenum is a primary ingredient in stainless steel, lending
strength and durability to structures. xi Molybdenum is also used in armored vehicles, missiles and aircrafts. Silver
is used in the construction of C17s and Apache helicopters, as well as many other defense tools.

Particularly important is the potential development of antimony mines. There are currently no antimony mines in
the U.S. and 60 percent of antimony used in the U.S. comes from China. xii Antimony is a critical mineral used in a
wide array of military applications including bullet manufacturing, night vision goggles, laser sighting, nuclear
weapons and production, communications equipment and more. xiii In the last year, Great Land Minerals, a U.S.
Antimony subsidiary, acquired three claims for exploration in Interior Alaska. Two of these claims are near the
Alaska Railroad. U.S. Antimony plans to truck the ore from Alaska to its processing plant in Montana – the only
such plant in the U.S. “We can’t get that antimony from Alaska to Montana fast enough,” Joe Bardswich, U.S.
Antimony’s chief mining officer, stated. xiv The rail access to tidewater at Port MacKenzie, paired with shipping
instead of trucking, can signiﬁcantly reduce transport cost of getting antimony to Montana.

Port MacKenzie can contribute to ameliorating U.S. trade imbalances.

Alaska has a six-day shipping advantage to Asia, relative to ports in British Columbia and the Paciﬁc Northwest. xv
Companies including Fort Knox Gold, Shorty Creek Copper, Livengood Gold, Usibelli Coal and Prospect Copper
have, in the past, expressed interest in seeing the port and rail extension developed for their use as a tidewater
hub. xvi Previously, Usibelli Coal Mine trucked coal to export through Port MacKenzie. If Port MacKenzie and the rail
extension can increase shipping directly to and from our international allies and partners, it will further boost the
economy, signaling stability and resilience to U.S. adversaries.

The completion of the Port MacKenzie rail extension will contribute to improving cost ratios of new mines,
increasing development potential and capacity for mineral export.

The completion of the Port MacKenzie rail extension would reduce the distance to port from Interior Alaska by
approximately 147 miles compared to the Port of Seward, Alaska’s other deep water, bulk commodities port. That
distance is approximately 30% of the full length of the rail line in Alaska. xvii Transporting goods to the Port of
Seward requires travelling uphill stretches through mountain passes that limit train load and speed. xviii The Port
MacKenzie rail extension would provide an alternative to that route for bulk commodity export. Additionally, the
Port MacKenzie rail extension would bypass the congested areas of Anchorage and Wasilla, further reducing
shipping time and expense for producers. xix

Port MacKenzie and the rail extension will support timber development.

Port MacKenzie has already been used for the bulk export of birch, aspen and spruce chips to South Korea, Taiwan
and Japan. xx With completion of the rail, the economics of transporting wood products from Interior Alaska to
tidewater are measurably improved, compared to transport of wood chips to port via truck.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Port MacKenzie, with the completed rail extension, will directly contribute to domestic resource development
and facilitate trade to enhance U.S. economic and national security. These projects are becoming more
imperative as interest grows in developing warﬁghter presence in Alaska and between the Arctic and Paciﬁc
regions. The port and rail can support the development of an LNG pipeline, stimulate new and existing mines in
Interior Alaska, and improve cost ratios of accessing and transporting other resources and materials. Continued
development of Port MacKenzie and completion of the Port MacKenzie rail extension are concrete, cost-
effective goals that will move Alaska and the United States toward more robust economic and national
security as laid out by EO 14153 and EO14241. To take advantage of this valuable infrastructure for “developing
[Alaska’s] resources to the fullest extent possible,” high priority should be placed on:

       1. Completion of the Port MacKenzie Rail Extension
             a. The rail extension will reduce transport costs for resource exports.
             b. The rail connection will provide tidewater access to new resource sites.
             c. The rail extension will increase mineral transport capacity and capability.
       2. Continued improvement of infrastructure at Port MacKenzie
             a. Investment is required to handle increasing volumes of imports and exports.
             b. Investment is required to handle a broader variety of materials and resources.
       3. Developing partnerships with resource development entities to increase and secure domestic
          mineral use and export via Port MacKenzie
             a. Mineral development in new locations depends on conﬁdence in available transport
                infrastructure.
             b. Port development must occur in conjunction with demonstrated demand.
             c. Establishing public-private partnerships can achieve the above-mentioned conditions.




   Author’s Disclaimer: The views expressed in this Brief are those of the author and do not reﬂect the official
                policy or position of the U.S. Department of Defense or of the U.S. Government.
APPENDIX
Figure 1: Port MacKenzie Transportation Infrastructure




Figure 1: This map shows access infrastructure to Port MacKenzie: the orange lines indicated existing roadways,
the black crosses indicate the Alaska Railroad mainline, and the red dashed indicates the general route of the
rail extension, which, when complete, will connect Port MacKenzie to the mainline at Houston. The rail
extension continues from the red dashed line to within the Port District.
Source: Matanuska-Susitna Borough, “Point MacKenzie Access,” ArcGIS StoryMaps, June 4, 2025,
https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/0b1cd52f4c47482d955a99e85f8af22c.
Figure 2: Port MacKenzie Current and Proposed Access




Figure 2: This map, current as of October 31, 2024, shows the location of Port MacKenzie and the route of the
partially constructed rail extension relative to other major existing and proposed infrastructure in the region.
Source: Matanuska-Susitna Borough, “Port MacKenzie | Planning,” accessed September 16, 2025,
https://portmackenzie.matsugov.us/pages/57ac92e23e784dd19ec8f302ce65e801.
    Figure 3: Mineral Deposits Along the Alaska Railbelt




Figure 3: This map indicates known mineral deposits within 100 kilometers of the Alaska Railbelt. Some of these
deposits hold critical minerals key to shoring up U.S. economic and national security.
Source: Paul Metz, Economic Analysis of Rail Link Port MacKenzie to Willow, Alaska, Phase II (2011).
End Notes
i
   President Donald Trump, “Unleashing Alaska’s Extraordinary Resource Potential,” Government, The White House,
January 21, 2025, https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/2025/01/unleashing-alaskas-extraordinary-resource-
potential/; President Donald Trump, “Immediate Measures to Increase American Mineral Production,” The White House,
March 20, 2025, https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/2025/03/immediate-measures-to-increase-american-
mineral-production/.
ii
    President Donald Trump, “EO 14153.”
iii
    President Donald Trump, “EO 14241.”
iv
    Matanuska-Susitna Borough, “Port MacKenzie Website,” Government, accessed August 24, 2025,
https://portmackenzie.matsugov.us/.
v
    Matanuska-Susitna Borough, “Point MacKenzie Access,” ArcGIS StoryMaps, June 4, 2025,
https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/0b1cd52f4c47482d955a99e85f8af22c.
vi
    Matanuska-Susitna Borough, “Port MacKenzie Rail Extension: A Project of Statewide Signiﬁcance and Beneﬁt, Helping to
Diversify the Alaskan Economy,” 2011.
vii
     Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Port MacKenzie Master Plan 2016 Update (2016).
viii
     Paul Metz, Economic Analysis of Rail Link Port MacKenzie to Willow, Alaska, Phase II (2011).
ix
    Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Port MacKenzie Master Plan 2016 Update; Metz, Rail Link Economic Analysis.
x
    “Minerals and Metals Help Improve Our National Security,” National Mining Association, February 3, 2017,
https://nma.org/2017/02/03/minerals-and-metals-help-improve-our-national-security/.
xi
    Edelman, “The Top Eight Minerals That Support National Defense,” Minerals Make Life, May 24, 2017,
https://mineralsmakelife.org/blog/the-top-eight-minerals-that-support-national-defense/.
xii
     Max Graham, “Fueled by Trade Tensions and Foreign Wars, a Rush for an Obscure Mineral Heats up in Alaska,” Alaska
Beacon, Northern Journal, June 6, 2025, https://alaskabeacon.com/2025/06/06/fueled-by-trade-tensions-and-foreign-
wars-a-rush-for-an-obscure-mineral-heats-up-in-alaska/.
xiii
     David Blackmon, “Antimony: The Most Important Mineral You Never Heard Of,” accessed September 15, 2025,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidblackmon/2021/05/06/antimony-the-most-important-mineral-you-never-heard-of/.
xiv
     Graham, “Fueled by Trade Tensions and Foreign Wars, a Rush for an Obscure Mineral Heats up in Alaska.”
xv
     Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Port MacKenzie Overview (2010).
xvi
     Elizabeth Gray, “Response to Senator Hoffman, Co-Chair, Senate Finance Committee,” personal communication,
March 4, 2011.
xvii
      Official State of Alaska Map, n.d.
xviii
      Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Port MacKenzie Overview.
xix
     “Response to Ken Williamson, WorleyParsons Calgary,” with David Hanson, Matanuska-Susitna Borough, December 1,
2010.
xx
     “Response to Ken Williamson, WorleyParsons Calgary.”
