                                           In-Confidence




Terms of Use: Provider access to Oranga Tamariki client record system (CYRAS).

Context

Oranga Tamariki enables a small number of social service providers to have limited access to its
client record system to support Oranga Tamariki work or to work on behalf of Oranga Tamariki.
These Terms of Use apply to those social service providers as part of their contract with Oranga
Tamariki.

Definitions

1    CAPP means CYRAS-Approved Provider Personnel, who are Personnel who have been
     approved by Oranga Tamariki to access CYRAS.

2    CYRAS (Care and Protection, Youth Justice, Residences, Adoptions System) means the
     Oranga Tamariki electronic case management system designed to record information
     about children, young people and their families who come to the attention of Oranga
     Tamariki.

3    CYRAS Agency Approval means formal written approval for a Provider or a Provider’s
     Personnel to access CYRAS.

4    Speciﬁed Policy or Procedure means policies or procedures for CYRAS use or use of
     Oranga Tamariki hardware speciﬁed by Oranga Tamariki to the Provider from time to
     time.

5    Speciﬁed Purpose means the purpose for CYRAS use speciﬁed in a CAPP’s application
     for CYRAS use.

6    Provider means an organisation that has been contracted by Oranga Tamariki to
     provide services, and which has been granted CYRAS Agency Approval by Oranga
     Tamariki.

General.

7    Oranga Tamariki may amend the Speciﬁed Policies or Procedures at any time.

8    Any information on CYRAS, including any information recorded on CYRAS by the
     Provider:

     8.1 is conﬁdential to Oranga Tamariki;

     8.2 may be accessed and used for lawful purposes by the Chief Executive of Oranga
         Tamariki and by people holding delegations of the Chief Executive’s statutory and
         other functions and powers;

     8.3 where it is personal information, is ‘held’ by Oranga Tamariki in terms of the
         Privacy Act 2020, meaning that unless speciﬁcally provided for in contract,


                                                                                                   1
                                        In-Confidence



          personal information collected, held or processed by the Provider on CYRAS is to
          be treated as being held by Oranga Tamariki and not the Provider, in accordance
          with section 11(2) Privacy Act 2020;

     8.4 is a public record ‘maintained’ by Oranga Tamariki in terms of the Public Records
         Act 2005; and

     8.5 is ‘oﬃcial information’ in terms of the Oﬃcial Information Act 1982.

CYRAS Agency Approval

9    CYRAS Agency Approval can be suspended or revoked by Oranga Tamariki:

     9.1 for breach of these Terms of Use;

     9.2 for breach of a Speciﬁed Policy or Procedure by the Provider or the Provider’s
         Personnel;

     9.3 for breach of relevant laws or practice standards by the Provider or the Provider’s
         Personnel;

     9.4 otherwise for a good cause relating to CYRAS use by the Provider or their
         Personnel; or

     9.5 for a period while investigating the above.

Approval for new CYRAS users.

10   CYRAS may only be used by CYRAS-Approved Provider Personnel (CAPPs).

11   The Provider:

     11.1 will apply for CYRAS access for a prospective CYRAS user in the manner speciﬁed
          by Oranga Tamariki;

     11.2 will, in that application, deﬁne the speciﬁed purposes for the prospective CYRAS
          user’s CYRAS access;

     11.3 will ensure that the prospective CYRAS user provides any information or consent
          requested by Oranga Tamariki; and

     11.4 will conduct any initial safety checks or vetting of the prospective CYRAS user
          required by law or by the Speciﬁed Policies and Procedures.

12   Oranga Tamariki:

     12.1 will review its own records about each prospective CYRAS user;

     12.2 will conduct any vetting required under the Speciﬁed Policies and Procedures;



                                                                                               2
                                        In-Confidence



     12.3 has absolute discretion whether to approve an application for CYRAS access; and

     12.4 may grant approval subject to any conditions that must be met by the prospective
          CYRAS user in order to receive or maintain CYRAS access.

Onboarding new CYRAS users:

13   The Provider will ensure that CAPPs:

     13.1 complete all training required by Oranga Tamariki on the Speciﬁed Policies and
          Procedures; and

     13.2 fulﬁl any other preconditions for CYRAS use imposed by Oranga Tamariki.

14   Oranga Tamariki will train CAPPs on all Speciﬁed Policies and Procedures. Once all
     training has been completed and any other conditions have been met, Oranga Tamariki
     will:

     14.1 provide any hardware needed for CAPPs to access CYRAS; and

     14.2 enable CYRAS access to the extent needed for the speciﬁed purposes.

15   Hardware provided by Oranga Tamariki remains the property of Oranga Tamariki.

Day-to-day responsibilities:

16   The Provider will ensure that:

     16.1 CYRAS will only be used by CAPPs, and only for the speciﬁed purposes;

     16.2 CAPPs agree to and follow the Speciﬁed Policies and Procedures, including by
          undertaking any additional training required from time to time;

     16.3 CAPPs access no technological or other support for CYRAS use except as
          provided by Oranga Tamariki; and

     16.4 safety checks or police vetting of the CAPP are carried out periodically, to the
          extent required by law or otherwise every three years.

17   Oranga Tamariki:

     17.1 will notify the Provider whenever the Speciﬁed Policies or Procedures change;

     17.2 will record all CYRAS usage under each CAPP’s account;

     17.3 may review a CAPP’s CYRAS use on its own initiative at any time;

     17.4 may undertake periodic audits of the Provider’s use of CYRAS in addition to any
          other audit rights under contract; and




                                                                                             3
                                        In-Confidence



     17.5 will provide, during regular oﬃce hours, technological and other support for
          CYRAS use to CAPPs.

Removing CYRAS users:

18   The Provider will notify Oranga Tamariki as soon as it knows that a CAPP:

     18.1 will cease using CYRAS for the speciﬁed purpose;

     18.2 will not use CYRAS for the speciﬁed purpose because of disciplinary concerns;

     18.3 is involved in any incident which would reasonably cause Oranga Tamariki to
          consider whether to suspend or revoke the CAPP’s CYRAS access; or

     18.4 will not use CYRAS for a period of greater than 3 months.

19   Oranga Tamariki may, of its own initiative, suspend or revoke a CAPP’s CYRAS access:

     19.1 for breach of a policy or procedure for CYRAS use or use of Oranga Tamariki
          hardware;

     19.2 for breach of relevant Laws or practice standards;

     19.3 otherwise for a good cause relating to CYRAS use by the Provider or their
          Personnel; or

     19.4 for a period while investigating the above.

20   Hardware provided by Oranga Tamariki for CYRAS use by a CAPP must be returned to
     Oranga Tamariki when that CAPP’s CYRAS access ends, or is suspended or revoked.

21   The Provider is liable for the cost of any hardware provided by Oranga Tamariki for
     CYRAS use if it is not returned in accordance with clause 20.




                                                                                            4
