                         GRID DEPLOYMENT OFFICE




FA C T S H E E T

2023 NATIONAL TRANSMISSION NEEDS STUDY
ALASKA
The U.S. Department of Energy’s Grid Deployment Office (GDO) released the National Transmission Needs Study (“Needs Study”)
in October 2023. The Needs Study is the Department’s triennial state of the grid report. It identifies transmission needs
and provides information about current and anticipated future capacity constraints and congestion on the Nation’s electric
transmission grid. In this fact sheet, we highlight the transmission needs of Alaska. The Needs Study provides further detail on
the benefits of transmission that could be realized throughout the country.




                                                                                                     Current or Anticipated Need
                                                                                                                                           Improve reliability & resilience

        ALASKA                                                                                                                                     Alleviate congestion &

          *
                                                                                                                                                       unscheduled flows       *
        * *                                                                                                                               Alleviate transfer capacity limits
                                                                                                                                                       between neighbors

                                                                                                                                         Deliver cost-effective generation
                                                                                                                                                          to meet demand



                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                   Meet future generation & demand with



                                                                                                     Anticipated Need
                                                                                                                                               within-region transmission


                                                                                                                                            interregional transfer capacity *
                                                                                                                                   Meet future generation & demand with




       *Wholesale market price data is limited for non-Regional Transmission Organization/Independent System Operator regions, and capacity expansion
                  modeling data is limited for Alaska. Absence of data does not necessarily indicate that there is no need for new transmission.



FINDINGS OF TRANSMISSION NEED IN ALASKA
› Improve reliability and resilience. Anticipated generation retirements in Alaska’s northern Railbelt region are expected
  to require capacity replacement from power purchase agreements with southcentral Railbelt utilities and new renewable
  resources installations. Transmission upgrades to deliver needed capacity to the northern Railbelt region would reduce
  existing capacity constraints negatively impacting the Alaska Intertie. Similarly, planned generation capacity increases on the
  Kenai Peninsula in the southern Railbelt region are anticipated to require transmission upgrades to reduce constraints and
  increase capacity exports on the Kenai Intertie. Further, deployment of additional transmission paths parallel to constrained
  single transmission lines—particularly near the interties and certain areas of the southcentral Railbelt region—would help
  reduce the need for load shedding following contingency events.
› Deliver cost-effective generation to meet demand. Outside of the Railbelt service region, rural Alaskan communities are
  served largely by standalone microgrids. Additional transmission between isolated Alaskan communities served by rural
  utilities, as well as increased rural utility interconnection with
  the Railbelt transmission system where feasible, would help
  accommodate higher levels of renewable capacity and help                HELPFUL LINKS
  supply cost-effective generation in areas that rely on                  › Read the full study at: www.energy.gov/gdo/
  higher-cost, imported diesel fuel.                                         national-transmission-needs-study

                                                                                             › Contact GDO with additional questions:
                                                                                               transmission@hq.doe.gov

Published October 2023
