HYP_Link
DOE Resources for Data Center Energy Demand Management
Jaclyn Ludema and Bob Sorensen
September 2024

RECENT DEVELOPMENT

The U.S. is entering a period of rapid electricity demand growth, driven by power consumptive
technologies such as AI, coupled with data center expansion and economic development, including
new domestic manufacturing. Electricity demand is expected to grow 15-20% in the next decade and
double by 2050. The DOE Office of Policy recently released the blog post - Clean Energy Resources
to Meet Data Center Electricity Demand, highlighting DOE resources designed to assist data center
developers in meeting electricity demands through clean energy solutions. DOE resources available to
data centers include loans, grants, FOAs, tax credits, and technical assistance for the following
initiative types:

    ▪   Grid Scale Clean Energy Deployment: Encouraging adoption of solar, wind, and battery
        storage, as scalable solutions
    ▪   Infrastructure Enhancement: Advocating for advancements in geothermal and nuclear energy
        to boost reliability and affordability
    ▪   Energy Efficiency: Promoting the COOLERCHIPS program to commercialize innovative
        cooling technologies, aiming for low Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE)
    ▪   Demand Side Flexibility: Identifying virtual power plants and efficiency improvements in
        various sectors to better meet demand
    ▪   Technical Assistance: Offering support to state and local officials, energy professionals, and
        large energy users in tackling electricity demand challenges

ANALYST COMMENT

These DOE resources are vital to addressing the electricity demands of the HPC market, particularly to
accommodate the higher electricity consumption of AI training and inferencing. Scientists are
continuously exploring the usefulness of AI across new applications, further expanding the demand for
sustainable, cost-effective, and reliable energy supplies wherever these scientists do their research. In
a world typified by regulatory compliance limitations and curbs, these DOE resources will likely serve as
valuable and persuasive incentives for managers to find energy solutions that work best for their unique
data center needs. As nations compete for leadership in emerging technologies, ensuring reliable and
sustainable energy for data centers will be crucial for maintaining economic and strategic advantages.


Copyright Notice

Copyright 2024 Hyperion Research LLC. Reproduction is forbidden unless authorized. All rights reserved. Visit
www.HyperionResearch.com to learn more. Please contact 612.812.5798 and/or email info@hyperionres.com for
information on reprints, additional copies, web rights, or quoting permission.



September 2024                             HR#12.0494.09.30.2024
