                               CLEARED
                          For Open Publication

                              Sep 27, 2024

                            Department of Defense
                  OFFICE OF PREPUBLICATION AND SECURITY REVIEW




Executive Summary
         August 2024
   This report is a product of the Defense Science Board (DSB). The DSB is a Federal Advisory
Committee established to provide independent advice to the Secretary of Defense. Statements,
  opinions, conclusions, and recommendations in this report do not necessarily represent the
                         official position of the Department of Defense.
MEMORANDUM FOR UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR RESEARCH AND
ENGINEERING
SUBJECT:        Defense Science Board (DSB) Report on Department of Defense Dependencies
on Critical Infrastructure
I am pleased to forward the final report of the DSB study on Department of Defense
Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure.
Per the terms of reference, the study focused on dependencies of DoD installations on outside-
the-fence critical civilian infrastructure and the concomitant implications for force projection and
continuous sustainment. The DSB made recommendations for Department organization and
engagement with infrastructure operators and the interagency building towards a whole-of-nation
approach to critical infrastructure resilience.
The DSB provided recommendations for rapid action on infrastructure mission resilience,
strategy and analysis, intelligence and threat assessment, gaming and exercising, and organizing
and resourcing. The study also provided sector-specific recommendations for electricity, bulk
fuel, communications, transportation and logistics, and water.
The findings, observations, and recommendations were presented to the full DSB, received
thorough discussion and deliberation, and were approved unanimously. I fully endorse the DSB
recommendations and urge their careful consideration and adoption.




Dr. Eric D. Evans
Chair, DSB
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK
MEMORANDUM TO THE CHAIRMAN, DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
SUBJECT:     Final Report of the Defense Science Board (DSB) Task Force on Department of
Defense Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Much has changed since this Task Force began its work in 2020 on DoD dependencies on
civilian-owned and operated critical infrastructure. Attacks on the U.S. homeland are an implicit
part of near-peer adversary warfighting doctrine. More recently, there has been a heightened
awareness and discussion of their infiltration into civilian infrastructure. If or when the Nation is
faced with a major contingency against near-peer adversaries, the Task Force concluded that the
consequences of delays and disruptions to force projection are potentially severe. Moreover, the
extent of adversary penetration could prolong infrastructure outages in ways that undermine
populace support for a longer war. But heightened awareness has yet to be translated into the
urgent, concrete action that DoD must take to have confidence in executing its war plans going
forward.
The Task Force observed immediately that the distinction between "competition" and "conflict"
is not serving the Department well. Adversaries have already moved past simple competition to
campaigns with actions that disrupt, degrade, and/or cripple civilian infrastructure that DoD and
the American public rely on. In their view, they are already in conflict with us.
The Task Force discovered many laudable activities across the Department, but they were almost
universally scattered and episodic, and lacked the scale or urgency needed. As a result, the Task
Force believes DoD does not see this problem in its entirety and has therefore not organized to
act on it. Because this is a Department-wide challenge, cutting across OSD, all Combatant
Commands, Military Services, and defense agencies, a Department-wide approach is needed.
The Task Force developed a set of recommendations to both get started and then sustain
attention, effort, and progress. Some obvious initial steps require adjustments to existing
Department activities, while sustainment will require an organizational construct for which there
is no clear existing model. As such, the principal recommendation is to stand up a "Mission
Infrastructure Resiliency" task force, co-led by the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition
and Sustainment and the Commander of North American Aerospace Defense Command and
United States Northern Command, to both implement the initial steps and recommend to the
Secretary of Defense the enduring organizational construct. That enduring construct must be
enabled by intelligence and threat assessment focused on critical infrastructure, a strong
analytical function that informs a "living" strategy that adapts to the changing threat, and gaming
and exercising that includes disruptions to the homeland as integral parts.
In parallel, the Task Force took "deep dives" into the four sectors it thought most critical to force
projection from the homeland: energy (electricity and bulk fuel), communications, transportation
and logistics, and water/wastewater. Recommendations specific to each of those sectors were
developed but have in common the need for DoD to partner and engage persistently with both
the responsible sector risk management agency and with civilian owner/operators from each of
those sectors.
In summary, DoD leadership must take seriously and give priority to their roles and
responsibilities to ensure the resiliency of civilian infrastructure on which it is so critically
dependent. No longer can the warning signs be downplayed or ignored. Both internal actions and
strong partnering outside the Department are paramount.




Dr. Miriam John                                       Hon. Judith Miller
Co-Chair                                              Co-Chair
                                                             DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




Table of Contents
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................... 1
  The Homeland is a Target ...............................................................................................................................1
   A Call for Urgency and Persistence .................................................................................................................1
   Four Sectors Critical to DoD Operations.........................................................................................................3
   Conclusion ........................................................................................................................................................3

Recommendations ........................................................................................................................................ 5
  Immediate “Doable-Dos" .................................................................................................................................5
   Getting Started .................................................................................................................................................5
   A Permanent Organization ..............................................................................................................................6
   Strategy ............................................................................................................................................................6
   Analysis.............................................................................................................................................................7
   Intelligence and Threat Assessment ..............................................................................................................7
   Gaming and Exercises .....................................................................................................................................8
   Energy (Electricity Sub-Sector) ........................................................................................................................8
   Energy (Bulk Fuel Sub-Sector).........................................................................................................................9
   Communications ..............................................................................................................................................9
   Transportation, Logistics, and Supply Chain ............................................................................................... 10
   Water and Wastewater ................................................................................................................................. 11

Appendix A: Terms of Reference ................................................................................................................ A-1

Appendix B: DSB Membership....................................................................................................................B-1

Appendix C: Task Force Membership ......................................................................................................... C-1

Appendix D: Briefings Received................................................................................................................. D-1

Appendix E: Acronym List ........................................................................................................................... E-1




DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                                                                         Table of Contents [i]
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK
                                         DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




Executive Summary
The Homeland is a Target
Department of Defense (DoD) operations in the homeland, whether day-to-day or in support of urgent
force projection, have always held some level of dependency on civilian-owned critical infrastructure.
These dependencies have grown significantly since the end of the Cold War. Outsourcing of services (e.g.,
electricity, water, ground transportation) has been deemed more efficient, reliable, and cost effective for
the Department. A similar model has been adopted by the service providers themselves, outsourcing
many of their own support services and supplies to lower tier providers. As a result, DoD is dependent on
increasingly fragile homeland infrastructure whose interdependencies are difficult to unravel, limiting
visibility into infrastructure resiliency against intentional attacks or natural disasters.
Conflict is effectively underway as adversaries acquire ever-expanding access and prosecute
sophisticated cyber operations against key civilian infrastructure targets. Their stated intent in both
doctrine and practice is to disrupt or disable civilian infrastructure on which DoD depends. If their attacks
on the homeland are successful on the scale and in the timeframes they seek, U.S. forces could be
prevented from winning—or possibly even getting to—the forward fight altogether.
Adversaries are pursuing—indeed escalating—attacks on the homeland, especially in the cyber domain.
Nonetheless, DoD characterizes the current situation as "competition" and not "conflict." Based on its
numerous interactions with seniors in the Department, the Task Force concluded that continuing to
believe we are in competition detracts from the reality we are already living and the urgency with which
we must address it.
This study sought to bring together several factors: an understanding of how those infrastructure
dependencies support the flow of forces and supplies from the homeland to prosecute DoD's war plans; if
and how infrastructure operations could be threatened and compromised; the ensuing impact on theater
operations; where operations could be seriously degraded; and what actions the Department should take
to mitigate the consequences. In doing so, the study concluded that:

                           DoD must prepare for attacks on the homeland.

Significant disruptions in force projection infrastructure most certainly will doom a "short war." But a "long
war" is equally fraught—persistent attacks on infrastructure could sap the nation's will to fight.

A Call for Urgency and Persistence
The Department cannot and should not go it alone. DoD's dependencies are sprawling and complex,
spanning multiple jurisdictions and authorities (federal, state, local, tribal, territories, Title 10, Title 32)
with widely insufficient understanding of responsibilities for infrastructure defense and protection.
Because these responsibilities lay at the intersection of homeland defense and homeland security (DoD
and Department of Homeland Security (DHS) writs respectively), as well as with sector risk management
agencies (SRMAs), ownership of the problem can be ambiguous.
These complexities demand a degree of partnership within the interagency and with civilian stakeholders
well in excess of DoD's demonstrated cultural inclinations—despite invitation from DHS and key SRMA
counterparts, DoD has failed to partner with and inform infrastructure owners of its priorities and



DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                         Executive Summary [1]
                                        DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




requirements at sufficient scale, scope, and level of leadership. At minimum, DoD can leverage existing
processes, agreements, and fora; to wit, by influencing implementation of the 2021 Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act (H.R. 3684/Public Law 117-58) by making its resiliency requirements known.
To avoid severe consequences in the homeland or to war plans, DoD must start to act with both urgency
and persistence. The study recommends some "blocking and tackling" actions to get started immediately:
       Normalize engagement between installation commanders and civilian infrastructure owners.
       Conduct tabletop exercises (TTXs) and games for specific installations with involvement from
        local or regional owners and operators to identify uncertainties and vulnerabilities and assess
        risk.
       Develop and exercise contingencies for disruptions to force projection and sustainment for war
        plans.
       Assign DoD points of contact for key infrastructure sectors with authority to commit to necessary
        actions or agreements.
       Better communicate infrastructure resiliency issues to inform collection, analysis, and offensive
        action.
But this is not a problem with a stopping point; adversaries will adapt. As such, the Department must
institutionalize a permanent approach organized and executed around managing an evolving set of risks.
Investments, especially in time and people, will be required, with persistent messaging with a campaign
mindset from the top down. Partnerships, within the interagency and with civilian stakeholders, are
indispensable in forging the necessary whole-of-nation approach to mission infrastructure resilience.
The initial steps listed above require adjustments to existing Department activities, while sustainment will
require an organizational construct for which there is no clear existing template. As such, the principal
recommendation is to stand up a "Mission Infrastructure Resiliency" (MIR) task force, co-led by the Under
Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment (USD(A&S)) and Commander, North American
Aerospace Defense Command and United States Northern Command (CDR N&NC), directed and
resourced to both implement the initial steps and recommend to the Secretary of Defense the enduring
organizational construct. The task
force should be given a deadline of
no longer than 18 months.
The enduring organizational
construct requires the support and
integration of key elements,
illustrated in Figure 1. Intelligence
and threat assessment should
inform strategy and analysis, which
comprises a mutual feedback loop
with gaming, exercises, and
sustainment fed by organization
and resources. These in turn            Figure 1. Key Elements of an Enduring Organizational Construct
support the mission.




DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                     Executive Summary [2]
                                       DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




Four Sectors Critical to DoD Operations
The study also provides more specificity around four sectors critical for force deployment and operations
from the homeland: energy (both electricity and fuel), communications, transportation, and water. Each is
critical to DoD operations in and of themselves but are also highly interdependent.
Each sector proved to be at different stages of maturity in recognizing the critical roles they play in
national security, in understanding the threats to their operations, and in doing—or being able to do—
anything about improving their resiliency.
       The electricity sub-sector of the energy sector is well organized and progressive under the
        leadership of the Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response (CESER) at
        the Department of Energy (DOE). Unfortunately, DoD has not articulated its priorities for functions
        and their Military Service-level requirements to enable timely and orderly restoration from a
        serious or prolonged outage.
       The communications sector is probably the most mature, based on its long-standing partnership
        with the U.S. government starting from the early days of AT&T. While more proliferated today with
        a greater number of providers, the sector has nonetheless retained a focus on resilience and its
        role in national security, in large part due to long-standing mechanisms for routine interactions
        with the U.S. government. Once its most engaged government partner, DoD involvement with the
        communications sector has unfortunately lapsed since the advent of DHS as communications
        SRMA.
       The transportation sector, which enables its close cousin "logistics," is diffuse and overseen by
        the Department of Transportation (DOT) whose dominant mission is maintaining a healthy flow of
        commerce. The air and maritime domains have suffered from underinvestment for some time
        and need attention to meet the demands of the new threat environment. Ground transportation
        within the United States is reliant on commercial rail, whose reliability and security are uncertain,
        or on the highway system with its aging bridges. Moreover, ports of embarkation are operated
        with equipment produced in the Peoples Republic of China.
       The water sector is focused on safety instead of security and consists of a plethora of water
        systems across the nation, for which uniform security practices will be difficult to implement.
        Despite recent warnings, intrusions, and disruptions in several water systems around the country,
        the sector's culture has yet to transition to prioritize security as it does health and safety.

Conclusion
During the Task Force's work, there was increasing focus on threats to critical infrastructure, and how to
organize to deal with these threats, culminating in the April 2024 National Security Memorandum on
Critical Infrastructure and Resilience (NSM-22). In the view of the Task Force, NSM-22 details a
comprehensive set of roles and responsibilities across the government. While encoding much of what is
already in practice, it also makes clear the expectations of the SRMAs, both within and among
themselves. While not explicitly linked to NSM-22, the Task Force findings provide DoD with an
assessment of where the Department is meeting its obligations and recommendations to close the gaps
where it is not.
In summary, DoD leadership must take seriously—and give priority to—their roles and responsibilities to
ensure the resiliency of civilian infrastructure on which it is so critically dependent. No longer can the
warning signs be downplayed or ignored. While this does not mean that DoD must pay for all that needs



DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                     Executive Summary [3]
                                       DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




to be done, it does mean that DoD must become a highly committed and visible partner with the civilian
owner/operators, both directly and through key government agencies, to help them bolster their
resilience. Doing so will erode adversary confidence in the homeland attack pillar of their doctrine and
contribute to deterring war altogether.




DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                   Executive Summary [4]
                                       DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




Recommendations

Immediate “Doable-Dos"
The findings point to some straightforward, low-cost steps for which there should be little debate or delay:
       Within the control perimeters of DoD installations and facilities, commanders responsible for the
        health and operations of the installation/facility should be informed by the mission owners on its
        premises of what infrastructure services are critical to the mission and what level(s) of resiliency
        mission operators may need.
       Senior civilians at installations or facilities should be tasked to develop and maintain ongoing
        relationships with local civilian infrastructure operators that support them to establish points of
        contact in outages and emergencies, as well as priorities for restoration of services.
        Consideration should be given to using the National Guard in these roles as individual
        Guardsmen are often dual-hatted in the civilian sector to operate the infrastructure services on
        which the installation/facility depends.
       Frequently asked questions, checklists, templates, and/or playbooks should be developed that
        allow installation leaders, mission owners, and civilian service providers to identify the most
        common uncertainties and vulnerabilities, as well as assess options for risk reduction. (Such a
        checklist should evolve over time as additional shortfalls are identified.) A gaming capability could
        also be developed that captures the essentials in a virtual format readily customizable to best
        characterize the local environment.
       Adding a reporting requirement on progress to address installation issues to motivate
        engagement and remediation (although installation commanders are required to report on
        disruptive events that occur which would support force deployment from garrison, reporting on
        the remediation plan is not).
       There should be an immediate shift to develop and exercise contingencies for disruptions to the
        flow of forces and their continuous sustainment.
       Points of contact (POCs) from DoD should be assigned to each of the key sectors to engage the
        SRMAs and their sector and government coordinating councils. The POCs should be given the
        authority to commit or staff various actions or agreements on behalf of the Department.
Many of the infrastructure resiliency issues the United States faces are the same "enjoyed" by our
adversaries. Those issues should be routinely communicated to the intelligence community (IC).


Getting Started
Secretary of Defense should empower and direct USD(A&S) and CDR N&NC to establish a Mission
Infrastructure Resilience (MIR) task force with an 18-month suspense to identify and ameliorate the
infrastructure resilience issues most important to successful USINDOPACOM and supporting Combatant
Command (CCMD) war plan execution starting in the homeland. The MIR task force should include
representatives from DHS Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), key SRMA
representatives, associated civilian infrastructure operators, as well as Military Service and United States
Cyber Command (USCYBERCOM) participation and be tasked as follows:
       Start with implementation of the "doable-do" list noted above.


DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                      Recommendations [5]
                                        DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD



       Make use of analysis capabilities at both DoD and DHS, as well as the expertise of the
        infrastructure operators, to assess options for improving infrastructure resilience to meet mission
        requirements.
       Define baseline infrastructure resilience standards for installation and facilities.
       Provide tailored threat products releasable to installation commanders and civilian operators to
        support this effort.
       Recommend the scope and structure for a DoD-wide permanent organization to replace the MIR
        at its suspense date.
The MIR task force should keep a list of limiting authorities or other roadblocks to effective action as they
are encountered for the purpose of informing potential policy or legislative changes.
To inform and focus the efforts of the MIR, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and
Hemispheric Affairs (ASD(HD&HA)) and Director, Joint Staff should prioritize installations and other
functions required to execute USINDOPACOM war plans. The focus should be on those installations,
routes, and embarkation points required for the initial flow of forces and their sustainment.
Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)) should develop and add a mission
infrastructure resilience metric to the Defense Readiness Reporting System (DRRS). Consider adapting
the Army's set of metrics which rank resilience from green to black. Metrics generally should describe
sustainability for greater than 30 days (green) to no capability (black).


A Permanent Organization
Secretary of Defense should act promptly to approve the follow-on recommendation of the 18- month MIR
task force for a permanent organization charged to continually address mission infrastructure resilience
across all areas of responsibility (AORs) and all domains to:
       Ensure that the organization is structured and resourced to support long-term partnerships
        across key sectors in the interagency and with civilian infrastructure owners.
       Ensure that the organization is given the authorities to consolidate, direct, and assess DoD-wide
        efforts.


Strategy
Secretary of Defense should direct:
       Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)) to adjust operational planning guidance to include
        planning assumptions that address threats/contested environments that relate to critical civilian
        infrastructure.
       Combatant Commands, starting with USINDOPACOM, to revise plans in accordance with the
        former adjustment.
USD(P) through ASD(HD&HA) should develop a strategy for ongoing work to assess risks and prioritize
action to ensure the flow of forces and continuous sustainment in a major contingency. The strategy
should include:




DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                      Recommendations [6]
                                         DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD



       Development of a time-phased approach that improves resiliency where needed, increases
        uncertainty for the adversary, and promotes deterrence through a persistent messaging
        campaign.
       Establishment of information sharing mechanisms with mission element owners, SRMAs, and
        civilian infrastructure owners.
       Define the roles and responsibilities of a supporting analytical capability.
Secretary of Defense in close partnership with the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) should establish
a program that is informed by the issues identified in the Department's own infrastructure dependencies
and employs the best practices of successful past DoD operations.


Analysis
The permanent organization, established after the 18-month MIR task force stands down, should charter
and secure the resources to establish a joint interagency analysis center (JIAC) that would:
       Provide the analysis and assessment functions to support prioritizing risks.
       Leverage the maturing tool set from DHS/CISA as a baseline for getting started.
       Focus "beyond the fence line," initially to address assurance/resiliency requirements for critical
        assets, but as tools mature, for force mobilization and projection.
       Be informed by the IC analysis of threats to critical infrastructure.
       Recommend mitigation plans, investments, and activities.
The JIAC should include participation by DHS, the IC, key sector owners and operators and their SRMAs
(e.g., DOE, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), DOT), making use of both physical and virtual
capabilities.
With the establishment of the JIAC for critical infrastructure risk reduction, the permanent organization
should direct the use of a formal risk assessment methodology by the Military Services for more localized
assessments.
       Assess adaptation of the National Risk Management Center (NRMC) in CISA for the JIAC and/or
        integrating aspects of the NRMC with the Critical infrastructure Defense Analysis Center (CIDAC).


Intelligence and Threat Assessment
If the threats to critical infrastructure are to be seriously addressed, then:
       National Security Council (NSC) should resolve perceived and real barriers to robust information
        sharing with the goal of establishing an enduring institutional approach to assessing and
        informing critical infrastructure owners of threats to their operations.
       DNI and Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), with participation from DHS, DOE
        and DoD should establish a “center for threats to critical infrastructure" modeled after the
        original concept for the Analysis and Resilience Center but focused on the sectors critical to
        homeland defense and force projection.
Because the above recommendations will require some time to be acted upon, some stop-gap actions
should be enacted, as follows:



DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                      Recommendations [7]
                                        DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD



       DNI and Director FBI should ensure a robust intelligence collection and analysis program in
        support of threats to critical infrastructure. Authorities and resources should be provided to the
        National Counterintelligence Officer (NCIO) at the National Counterintelligence and Security
        Center (NCSC) to function across the IC, with a charter to:
            – Provide timely threat assessments to SRMAs for dissemination to critical infrastructure
                owners.
            – Work closely with the DoD's critical infrastructure lead to ensure timely communications
                with defense infrastructure owners.
            – USD(P) should ensure force planning guidance includes serious disruptions of critical
                civilian infrastructure services for power projection scenarios.


Gaming and Exercises
USD(P) through ASD(HD&HA) and DNI should expand the critical infrastructure gaming approach into a
more widely applicable and ongoing capability. This should include a periodic examination of all exercise
results to identify if/how current strategy and priorities should be revised.
Overarching the entire Department's approach, exercises should be designed and executed with realistic
disruptions to the homeland and other key supply chain(s). In almost every case, key civilian
infrastructure owners/operators and local/regional government representatives should be included as
advisors, if not players. Specific actions include:
       Secretary of Defense require all CCMDs exercise under conditions in which operations in the
        homeland are simultaneously disrupted during execution of operation plans.
       Secretary of Defense require all CCMDs identify commercial supply chain infrastructure that
        exists in their AORs and determine their criticality, risk to mission, and mitigation to ensure their
        resiliency if disrupted, and direct that United States Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM)
        and Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) support their efforts.
       Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) require that all globally integrated exercises (GIEs)
        include realistic attacks on the homeland as a starting point and in parallel with overseas
        contingencies.
       CIDAC (or its replacement as recommended in the Analysis section) develop and maintain a
        gaming and exercise assessment program to monitor progress.
Any of the above exercises or assessments should include red team expertise, not only to provide realistic
descriptions or pathways to attacks, but to be part of the play or assessment to represent adversary
adaptation. Advantage should be taken of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and CISA
national exercise programs.


Energy (Electricity Sub-Sector)
Planning and Resourcing. The 18-month MIR task force, followed by the permanent organization
established after, should partner with CISA and CESER to establish an integrated resource and
infrastructure planning process.
       Aligned with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), state public utility commissions
        (PUCs) regulatory processes, and industry standards with respect to resilience.


DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                       Recommendations [8]
                                         DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD



       Address restoration prioritization and requirements, hardening, and mission-specific service
        needs with local utility providers.
       Under CESER's leadership, help form and support a working group to create a playbook for using
        DOE's specific Defense Critical Electric Infrastructure (DCEI) authorities for national security
        needs.
       Working with CESER, under its DCEI authorities, identify DoD-specific needs and priorities that
        should be addressed in the infrastructure grants (especially for co-ops) to address service-level
        requirements in a national security emergency.

Mission Essential Civilian Infrastructure. Each Military Service installation and energy office should:
       Prioritize installations serving mission critical assets to identify—in partnership with the utility(ies)
        servicing the installation—the subset of civilian infrastructure that are single points of failure.
       Update service-level agreements (SLAs), or issue new templates, to include "resilience-as-a-
        service,"
       Extend black start/energy resilience and response exercises to include civilian infrastructure
        beyond the fence line.

Industry Best Practices. Each Military Service installation and energy office should:
       Ensure procurement of generators and controllers from a single vendor at each installation.
       Review existing renewable energy assets for potential retrofit to enable islanded, off-grid
        operation and delivery of power to critical mission facilities on the installation.
       Solicit independent power producers to integrate stranded backup generation assets into a
        virtual power plant during blue-sky conditions to assure the health of backup power sources.


Energy (Bulk Fuel Sub-Sector)
USD(A&S) should consolidate responsibilities for bulk fuel oversight within a single office in OUSD(A&S).
       Task the office with identifying sustainment dependencies on critical civilian infrastructure and
        communicate to the DHS Transportation Security Administration (TSA), CCMDs, and critical
        industry partners annually.
USTRANSCOM and DLA partner to expand capabilities for monitoring bulk fuel in transit.
       Provide CCMDs, Military Services, and OSD near real-time visibility of all fuel that is en route to
        prosecute readiness and wartime requirements.
       Extend to overseas sources.


Communications
The 18-month MIR task force supported by the Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) should
establish a focused effort between DoD and industry through the Enduring Security Framework to re-
evaluate the global architectures associated with continuity of government/continuity of mission in the
context of a contested environment.
Immediate, short- and long-term mitigation strategies should be created, and the organizational construct
for enduring engagement with the communications sector. Specific areas to be addressed include:


DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                          Recommendations [9]
                                       DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD



       Transforming the current DoD network architecture to be software defined networking and
        network functions virtualization (SDN/NFV) ready (policy, plans—implementation at installation
        level) to support distributed processing and a higher level of resilience at the command/regional
        level.
       Creating stand-by on-ramps to DoD network architecture for key partners/peers/critical
        infrastructure support including fiber and spectrum (policy, planning).
       Adopting and mastering new environments/technologies (policy, planning "sandboxes"), such as:
             – Distributed, next-gen wired/wireless access, transport, and processing infrastructure.
             – SDN/NFV/Network slicing.
             – Underlying technologies such as quantum computing, artificial intelligence/machine
                 learning, and neuro linguistic programming.
       Lead organizations to represent DoD in new environment frameworks should be identified (policy,
        planning, in cooperation with other U.S. government agencies and internationally); e.g.,
             – 5G/6G wireless standards.
             – Interoperability: open radio access network (OpenRAN), metro ethernet forum (MEF),
                 application programming interface (API).
             – Defining the next-gen for internet protocol (IP) networks.
Installation commanders and mission owners at the local and regional levels should communicate their
communications and disruption mitigation requirements and collaborate with their local service providers
to ensure the degree of resiliency sought is addressed via contractual means.
DISA should identify options and implement a subset to ensure critical communications across
command/regional borders, e.g.,
       Space: leverage multiple satellite transport providers to provide higher level of assurance for
        cross border communications.
DoD Chief Information Officer (CIO) direct transition next-gen DoD architecture throughout the entire DoD
enterprise from hub-and-spoke to highly distributed architectures that leverage private and public assets.
       Create a global meshed architecture balancing comparable missions and capabilities by
        geographic regions.
       Manage the DoD enterprise as a highly distributed, highly resilient collection of
        command/regional enclaves using SDN/NFV.
       "Mesh" the base/installation to bring higher assurance for individual installations. In addition to
        communications, considerations for ensuring sufficient power/water/fuel to sustain mission
        critical communication operations should be incorporated.
       Connect self-sufficient installations to enable a self-sufficient regional enclave that can execute
        comparable missions.


Transportation, Logistics, and Supply Chain
Immediately, MIR task force should conduct modeling and simulation studies to assess impacts of
complications facing USTRANSCOM in support of war plans.
       Provide for deliberations in the next program objective memorandum (POM) cycle.




DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                     Recommendations [10]
                                          DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD



DLA and USTRANSCOM team with the CCMDs to generate options for managing logistics demands from
the homeland for timely delivery of limited supplies.
       Identify and provide to all CCMDs the commercial supply chain infrastructure that supports their
        war plans.
       CCMDs then determine the criticality, risk to mission, and mitigation measures where needed for
        the elements in their war plans specific supply chain.
       USTRANSCOM and DLA “close the loop" with the CCMDs to develop contingency plans for limited
        supplies, as well as for limited transportation assets.
       CCMDs include supply disruptions in annual exercises, as well as request supporting analyses to
        define minimum quantitative logistics requirements for war plan execution.
USD(A&S) identify opportunities to expand the Warstopper Program.1


Water and Wastewater
The MIR 18-month task force should recommend how DoD should manage the water sector on an
enduring basis, akin to what is already underway for energy. Tasks include:
       Piloting outreach to waste and wastewater systems, starting with collective defense for the
        Metropolitan Water District.
       Building on DHS Regional Resiliency Assessment Program (RRAP) and the winter storm
        challenges that Texas recently faced to enlist San Antonio Water System to pilot DoD installations
        cooperation with a water system that has done significant resiliency work, but not with DoD as of
        this writing.
       Promoting close, “joined-at-the-hip" relations between electric utilities and water/wastewater
        systems. They are naturally interdependent and need to work together. “Energy supply depends
        on water. Water supply depends on energy2.”
Water and wastewater sector issues cannot be "white carded." Solutions that solve disruptions or outages
for a day or two are not sufficient. What is required is sustained analysis, outreach, and advocacy by DoD
to fix both short- and long-term problems once they are identified.




1 The Warstopper Program was created in 1994 in part to replace war reserves not used during Operation

Desert Storm. Vendors are contractually obligated to maintain shelf life of medical material identified as critical
to the Services if/when they go to war by rotating it with commercial stock. DoD becomes "customer number
one" with ready access to contracted supplies.
2 “Energy and Water – Topics,” IEA, https://www.iea.org/topics/energy-and-water.




DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                         Recommendations [11]
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK
                                       DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




Appendix A: Terms of Reference




DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                              Terms of Reference [A-1]
                                       DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                              Terms of Reference [A-2]
                                       DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                              Terms of Reference [A-3]
                                       DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




Appendix B: DSB Membership
Dr. Eric Evans, Chair                                       Dr. John Manferdelli
Mr. Michael Appelbaum                                       Dr. Katherine McGrady
Dr. Jennifer Bernhard                                       Dr. James Miller
Dr. Alison Brown                                            Dr. DJ Patil
Dr. Kimberly Budil                                          Dr. Gary Polansky
Mr. James Carlini                                           Dr. Sanjay Raman
Dr. Tomás Díaz de la Rubia                                  Dr. David Relman
Mr. Fred Dixon                                              Gen Paul Selva, USAF (ret.)
Adm William Fallon, USN (ret.)                              Dr. Nashlie Sephus
Ms. Laetitia de Cayeux                                      Dr. Reshma Shetty
Mr. Robert Giesler                                          Dr. Alfred Spector
Dr. Johney Green                                            Dr. Vincent Tang
Dr. Robert Grossman                                         Dr. Dorota Temple
Dr. Daniel Hastings                                         Dr. Jan Tighe
Dr. Ayanna Howard                                           Dr. Bradford Tousley
Dr. Evelyn Hu                                               Dr. David Van Wie
Hon. Shirley Ann Jackson                                    Ms. Mandy Vaughn
Dr. Ashanti Johnson                                         Dr. Dinesh Verma
Dr. Paul Kaminski                                           Dr. Steven Walker
Dr. Ann Karagozian                                          Dr. Robert Wisnieff




DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                         DSB Membership [B-1]
                                       DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




Appendix C: Task Force Membership
Task Force Co-Chairs
Dr. Miriam John
Hon. Judith Miller

Task Force Members
Mr. Guy Beougher*
Mr. Robert Butler
Ms. Kathryn Condello
ADM William Fallon (USN, Ret.)
GEN Paul Kern (USA, Ret.)
Mr. Erik Limpaecher
Dr. John Manferdelli
Mr. Dave McRee
Mr. Jim Shields
Dr. Jim Tegnelia
Brig Gen Paul Welch (USAF, Ret.)

Additional Members (Pre-Zero-Based Review) i
Mr. John Forte
Mr. Jim Gosler
Mr. Jonathon Monken
Dr. Len Napolitano
Hon. Paul Stockton
VADM Ed Straw (USN, Ret.)

Executive Secretary
Mr. Jan Ithier, NORAD/USNORTHCOM
Mr. Phil Kellogg, USD(P)
Mr. Arthur Lord, USD(P) (Pre-ZBR)

Government Advisors
Mr. Steve Harris, CISA
Mr. Brad Koerkenmeier, USTRANSCOM

Government Advisors (Pre-Zero-Based Review)
Mr. Steve Harris, DHS/CISA
Mr. Chris Lowery, DHS/CISA
Ms. Sue Armstrong, DHS/CISA
Mr. Guy Beougher,* DLA
Ms. Pat Hoffman, DOE/Office of Electricity



DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                              Task Force Membership [C-1]
                                       DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




Mr. Chuck Kosak, DOE/Office of Electricity
Mr. Sean Plankey, DOE/SESER
Mr. Chris Sledjeski, DOE/IN
Dr. Bill Tedeschi, DOE/IN
Dr. Dakota Robertson, White House Fellow
Ms. Lisa Jung, DASD(Energy)
Dr. Ariel Castillo, ODASD(Energy)
Mr. Bruce Krapovicky, OUSD(I)
Mr. Mike McAndrew, OUSD(A&S)

DSB Secretariat
Ms. Elizabeth Kowalski, DSB Designated Federal Officer (DFO)
Mr. Kevin Doxey, DSB DFO (former)
Mr. Sean Hagerty, Alternate DFO (ADFO)
Mr. Troy Techau, ADFO

Support Staff
Ms. Allison Holbert (SAIC)
Mr. Mark Brophy (SAIC)
Ms. Brenda Poole (SAIC)




i “Pre-ZBR” refers to the zero-based review of DoD advisory committees that commenced in February 2021.

The zero-based review (ZBR) paused work and changed overall DSB membership. When the Task Force
resumed their work in late 2022, individuals noted with “Pre-ZBR” did not continue on the Task Force.

*Mr. Guy Beougher, an advisor to the Task Force pre-ZBR became a member of the Task Force post-ZBR.




DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                               Task Force Membership [C-2]
                                        DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




Appendix D: Briefings Received

Meeting 1 (19-20 February 2020)                             Meeting 3 (18-19 June 2020)
Summary of the DSB Report on DoD Roles in                   Grid 101: Grid Threats and Resilience Options
Homeland Security                                           Task Force members and Defense Critical Electric
Task Force Co-Chair                                         Infrastructure (DCEI)/DOE
The Mission Assurance (MA) Construct;                       Discussion Points: Gas-Electric
Developing an Understanding of Infrastructure               Interdependencies
Dependencies; and Risk Management –                         Task Force members
Guidance, Oversight and Process
J36                                                         New Attack Windows, Gas-Electric
                                                            Interdependencies, and DCEI Resilience Options
Key Homeland Mission 1: Flow of Forces                      Deputy Assistant Secretary (DAS), DOE,
USTRANSCOM                                                  Infrastructure Security and Emergency Response
Key Homeland Mission 2: Logistics and Supply                (ISER)
Defense Logistics Agency (DLA)                              Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis
Key Homeland Mission 3: Homeland Defense                    Center (E-ISAC), North American Electric
NORAD & USNORTHCOM (N&NC)                                   Reliability Corporation (NERC)
                                                            NERC
Meeting 2 (27-28 May 2020)                                  Defense Installation Energy Resilience (“inside
                                                            the fence line”): DoD Installation Energy
Some Insights from the COVID Pandemic and
                                                            Resilience Policies, Guidance, Tools, Initiatives,
Implications for Critical Infrastructure
                                                            and Partnerships
N&NC
                                                            Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Energy
Cyber Supply Chain                                          (DASD(Energy)) and Massachusetts Institute of
DSB Task Force Cyber Supply Chain                           Technology Lincoln Laboratory (MIT-LL)
Defense Logistics Agency’s Lessons Learned in               Building Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP) Resilience
COVID19                                                     EIS Council
DLA Notes
                                                            Emerging Threats to the Energy Sector and
The Cyberspace Solarium Commission –                        Implications for DOD Mission Assurance
Background, Emerging Strategy and                           Task Force member
Recommendations
Solarium Commission                                         Meeting 4 (16-17 July 2020)
Survivable Logistics                                        Analysis of Potential Adversary Actions on the
Survivable Logistics Task Force Chair                       Power System from a Long Standoff Distance
Bulk-Power System (BPS) Executive Order                     Schweitzer Engineering Labs
Implementation                                              Power Systems Infrastructure Protection
Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of Electricity,          DASD(Energy)
Department of Energy (DOE)
                                                            Projects Improving DoD Installation Energy
                                                            Posture Using Available Financing Authorities
                                                            DASD(Energy)




DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                      Briefings Received [D-1]
                                        DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




Collaboration Efforts with DoD: EEI Collaboration           DoD R&D for Energy Resilience: Micro-Reactor
Edison Electric Institute (EEI)                             Effort
                                                            DASD(E)
Collaboration Efforts with DoD: NRECA
Collaboration
NRECA                                                       Meeting 5 (20-21 August 2020)
Alternative Financing                                       Framework for CI and Critical DoD Mission
Converge Strategies                                         Resilience
                                                            Task Force member
Industry Perspectives on Strengthening DCEI
Resilience and Key Opportunities for Progress               DoD Energy Resilience for Mission Assurance
National Infrastructure Advisory Council (NIAC) and         Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
Dominion Energy                                             (OUSD(P))

Energy Resiliency Perspective                               Mission Assurance Identification Process
Dominion Energy                                             OUSD(P)

DOE Defense Critical Electric Infrastructure                Jack Voltaic Research Project
Effort                                                      U.S. Army Cyber Institute
DOE                                                         SoCal Tech Bridge
Research and Development (R&D) Initiatives in               NavalX
Support of Broader Grid Resilience: DOE,                    San Antonio-Electromagnetic Defense
National Labs, and Industry – Building a                    Electromagnetic Defense Initiative (EDI)
Resilient Electric Grid
DOE                                                         National Security Collaboration Center (NSCC)
                                                            NSCC
R&D Initiatives in Support of Broader Grid
Resilience: DOE, National Labs, and Industry –              NSCC Overview
                                                            NSCC
Electric Grid Security & Resilience
Sandia National Laboratories (SNL)                          Regulatory Issues and Opportunities for
R&D Initiatives in Support of Broader Grid                  Progress
                                                            National Association of Regulatory Utility
Resilience: DOE, National Labs, and Industry –
                                                            Commissioners (NARUC)
Idaho National Laboratory (INL) Grid Resilience
Initiatives
INL
                                                            Meeting 6 (10-11 September 2020)
DoD R&D for Energy Resilience: More Situational             Communications Sector Introduction
Awareness for Industrial Control Systems                    Task Force member
(MOSAICS) and Smart Power Infrastructure                    National Critical Functions
Demonstration for Energy Reliability and                    National Risk Management Center (NRMC)
Security (SPIDERS)
SNL
                                                            Contingency Planning for Significant Cyber
                                                            Incidents
DoD R&D for Energy Resilience: Regional                     Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
Identification of Gaps for Operational Resilience           (CISA)
(RIGOR) – piloted at Joint Base Elmendorf
                                                            Regional Resiliency Assessment Program
Richardson (JBER)
                                                            CISA
INL and Converge Strategies
                                                            PNT-EMP Risks for Telecommunications
                                                            CISA



DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                       Briefings Received [D-2]
                                        DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




2012 National Sector Risk Assessment for                    Meeting 9 (16-17 December 2020)
Communications
Department of Homeland Security (DHS)                       Reducing DoD Energy Sector Risks – Planning
                                                            and Finance
Optical PNT: Fiber-based National Terrestrial               Task Force member and Converge Strategies
Timing Network
OPNT                                                        Project Athens: DCI Application
                                                            DARPA
CI: Undersea Cable Concerns
SubCom, LLC                                                 Pipeline Cybersecurity Initiative – Considerations
                                                            for DoD Infrastructure
Meeting 7 (27-28 October 2020)                              NRMC
                                                            Civil Reserve Air Fleet Overview/VISA Overview
Dependency on Power
                                                            USTRANSCOM
Task Force member
                                                            Programs for National Defense
China, COVID, and Comms/Supply Chain
                                                            (Highways/Railroads/Ports)
WBKLaw
                                                            USTRANSCOM
Cybersecurity Concerns: BGP, DNS, DMARC,
                                                            Safeguarding Seaport and Airport Functions
Enterprise, WFH, Consumer Behaviors
                                                            Port of Seattle
The Internet & Television Association (NCTA)
48 Hours—Are We Prepared for that Speed of                  Meeting 10 (12-13 January 2021)
Response?
Task Force member                                           Surge Layer Defense
                                                            Office of the Director of National Intelligence
COVID-19 Communications Sector Performance                  (ODNI)
and Initiatives
Task Force member and USTelecom                             Department of Transportation Maritime
                                                            Administration (MARAD) Overview
Assuring Resiliency: DoD Missions and Critical              DOT MARAD
Infrastructure Partners
USTelecom                                                   National Critical Functions: Insights for DSB
                                                            NRMC
How Can USTelecom Help Solve DoD Problem
USTelecom                                                   Security Plan, Implementation, Priorities
                                                            NRMC
Meeting 8 (18-19 November 2020)
                                                            Meeting 11 (30 Nov – 1 Dec 2022)
DOE Efforts at Testing, Joint Work with DoD, Risk
Assessments and Hardening: EMP Threats                      Updates since January 2021 – Logistics and
DOE                                                         EMP
                                                            Task Force member
DOE Efforts at Testing, Joint Work with DoD, Risk
Assessments and Hardening: Cyber Threats                    Cyber Risks Posed by the Transformation of the
DOE                                                         Grid
                                                            Task Force member
DOE Efforts at Testing, Joint Work with DoD, Risk
Assessments and Hardening: Homeland Threats                 Current Trends in Energy Security Risk
DOE                                                         Task Force member
                                                            DOD Critical Infrastructure Efforts
                                                            OSD(P)




DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                       Briefings Received [D-3]
                                       DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




Critical infrastructure Defense Analysis Center             Transportation Logistics
(CIDAC)                                                     White House Supply Chain Task Force
CIDAC
                                                            Water and Wastewater Systems Security and
Deputies’ Committee-Directed Interagency                    Resilience
Critical Infrastructure Project                             CISA
OSD(P)
                                                            U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) Overview
USNORTHCOM DCI List and PLANORD                             of Civil Works: Water Resources
OSD(P)                                                      USACE
Force Protection                                            Water Systems and Vulnerabilities – Water 101:
OSD(P)                                                      How Water Works
                                                            American Water Works Association
DCI Project Overview
OSD(P)
                                                            Meeting 15 (19-20 April 2023)
Meeting 12 (12-13 January 2023)                             Joint Concepts for Contested Logistics
                                                            Joint Staff, J-4
Global Perspectives
NORAD and USNORTHCOM (N&NC), J55                            Arctic Infrastructure and MOSAICS
                                                            N&NC
N&NC Guidance, Plans, and Infrastructure
Protection                                                  Theater Sustainment Structure
N&NC, J55                                                   USINDOPACOM
Defense Critical Infrastructure: Commander’s                DLA Illumination on Commercial
Estimate Appraisal                                          Dependencies, Warehousing, Defense Fuel
N&NC, J55                                                   Support Points, All Pipelines and
                                                            Recommendations
N&NC J8 – Quiver Model
                                                            Task Force member
N&NC, J8
                                                            Operational Requirements & Commercial
The CISA Briefings
CISA
                                                            Dependencies
                                                            DLA
Meeting 13 (15-16 February 2023)                            Operational Requirements & Commercial
                                                            Dependencies
Cyber Security and Infrastructure Security                  DLA
Agency
CISA                                                        The Military Surface Deployment and
                                                            Distribution Command (SDDC) – Delivering in
Assessment of Threats                                       Support of Global Combatant Command
U.S. Army G2
                                                            Requirements
Energy and Control Systems Resilience Exercise              Capability Development Integration Directorate
Findings                                                    (CDID), U.S. Army
MIT/LL
                                                            Meeting 16 (17-18 May 2023)
Meeting 14 (22-23 March 2023)
                                                            Threats to Critical Infrastructure
Threat Brief                                                ODNI, MITRE
N&NC, U.S. Air Force, Defense Intelligence Agency




DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                      Briefings Received [D-4]
                                         DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




Insights from Mission Level Cyber Risk                      Fairfax Water Overview
Assessments                                                 Fairfax Water
Cyber Warfare – Office of the Under Secretary of
                                                            Perspectives of Resilience and Response
Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment
                                                            National Security Council
(OUSD(A&S))
                                                            Water Resiliency in San Antonio
Intel Brief
                                                            San Antonio Water System (SAWS)
CISA
Critical Infrastructure Defense Analysis Center             Meeting 19 (23-24 August 2023)
(CIDAC) – updates from 1 Dec 2022
OSD(P) and The Defense Threat Reduction Agency              Installation Readiness
(DTRA)                                                      Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Army for
                                                            Installations, Energy & Environment
Framework for Aligning Domestic and Defense                 Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff, G-9
Resources                                                   (Installations)
OSD(P) and DTRA                                             Headquarters, Army Materiel Command
DoD and Critical infrastructure                             Headquarters, Installation Management Command
OSD(P) and DTRA                                             Pacific Northwest National Laboratories (PNNL)
                                                            Installation Resiliency and Awareness of
Meeting 17 (28-29 June 2023)                                Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
                                                            Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland
Threat Discussion                                           Defense and Hemispheric Affairs (ASD(HD&HA)
Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for                and OSD(P)
Intelligence and Security (OUSD(I&S))
Discussion on the Electric Sector Handout: A
Communication from Bruce Walker
Southern Company
BNSF Railway: Logistics, Operations, Technology,
Resource Protection Network
BNSF Railway
NORAD/USNORTHCOM Perspectives
N&NC

Meeting 18 (25-26 July 2023)
Landscape of Critical Infrastructure (Strategic
Plan, Threats, DoD Engagement, Authorities and
Policy) – A Office of Cyber Security, Energy
Security, and Emergency Response (CESER)
Overview
CESER/DOE
Water and Wastewater Infrastructure in the
Metropolitan Washington Region
Metropolitan Washington Council of Government
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission
(WSSC) Overview
WSSC


DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                     Briefings Received [D-5]
                                       DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




Appendix E: Acronym List
AORs                areas of responsibility
API                 application programming interface
ASD(HD&HA)          Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Hemispheric Affairs
BPS                 bulk-power system
CDR                 Commander
CCMD                Combatant Command
CDID                Capabilities, Development and Integration Directorate, U.S. Army
CESER               DOE Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response
CIDAC               Critical infrastructure Defense Analysis Center
CIO                 Chief Information Officer
CISA                DHS Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
CJCS                Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
DARPA               Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DASD(Energy)        Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Energy
DCEI                Defense Critical Electric Infrastructure
DCI                 defense critical infrastructure
DHS                 Department of Homeland Security
DISA                Defense Information Systems Agency
DLA                 Defense Logistics Agency
DNI                 Director of National Intelligence
DoD                 Department of Defense
DOE                 Department of Energy
DOT                 Department of Transportation
DRRS                Defense Readiness Reporting System
DSB                 Defense Science Board
DTRA                Defense Threat Reduction Agency
EDI                 Electromagnetic Defense Initiative
EEI                 Edison Electric Institute
E-ISAC              Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center
EMP                 electromagnetic pulse
EPA                 Environmental Protection Agency
FBI                 Federal Bureau of Investigation
FEMA                Federal Emergency Management Agency


DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                      Acronym List [E-1]
                                        DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




FERC                Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
GIEs                globally integrated exercises
IC                  intelligence community
INL                 Idaho National Laboratory
IP                  internet protocol
JIAC                joint interagency analysis center
MA                  mission assurance
MARAD               United States Maritime Administration
MEF                 metro ethernet forum
MIR                 Mission Infrastructure Resilience
MIT/LL              Massachusetts Institute of Technology/Lincoln Laboratory
MOSAICS             more situational awareness for industrial control systems
N&NC                NORAD/USNORTHCOM
NCIO                National Counterintelligence Officer
NCSC                National Counterintelligence and Security Center
NCTA                National Cable & Telecommunications Association
NERC                North American Electric Reliability Corporation
NORAD               North American Aerospace Defense Command
NRECA               National Rural Electric Cooperative Association
NRMC                National Risk Management Center
NSC                 National Security Council
NSCC                National Security Collaboration Center
NSM-22              National Security Memorandum on Critical Infrastructure and Resilience
OpenRAN             open radio access network
OPNT                optical position, navigation, and timing
OUSD(A&S)           Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment
OUSD(I&S)           Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security
OSD(P)              Office of the Secretary of Defense for Policy
PNT                 position, navigation, and timing
POCs                points of contact
PUCs                public utility commissions
R&D                 research and development
RIGOR               regional identification of gaps for operational resilience
RRAP                Regional Resiliency Assessment Program
SAWS                San Antonio Water System


DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                        Acronym List [E-2]
                                         DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD




SDN/NFV             software defined networking and network functions virtualization
SLAs                service-level agreements
SNL                 Sandia National Laboratories
SPIDERS             smart power infrastructure demonstration for energy reliability and security
SRMAs               sector risk management agencies
TSA                 Transportation Security Administration
TTXs                tabletop exercises
USACE               U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
USD(P&R)            Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
USD(P)              Under Secretary of Defense for Policy
USINDOPACOM         United States Indo-Pacific Command
USNORTHCOM          United States Northern Command
USTRANSCOM          United States Transportation Command
WSSC                Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission




DSB Report on DoD Dependencies on Critical Infrastructure
Executive Summary                                                                        Acronym List [E-3]
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK
