     Promotion of Watt-Bit Collaboration Project to achieve Green Transformation

     ~World’s first watt-bit collaboration optimization model experiment to being
                         at The University of Tokyo campus ~

                                                                        October 8, 2025
                                                                 The University of Tokyo
                                                                TEPCO Power Grid, Inc.


 The University of Tokyo (President: Teruo Fujii) and TEPCO Power Grid, Inc. (Head
Office: Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo; President & Chief Executive Officer: Yoshinori Kaneko;
hereinafter referred to as, “TEPCO PG”) are teaming up to trailblaze a watt-bit
optimization model that leverages the attributes of information and communication
technology (“bit”) to optimize power (“watt”) demand in order to promote green
transformation at The University of Tokyo and build new sustainable society models.



 The University of Tokyo has promoted the use of renewable energies and the
spatial/temporal understanding of power consumption until then. In addition to these
initiatives, we will promote the integrated visualization of overall power consumption on
campus and the institution’s carbon footprint*1, and leveraging energy data from power
grids, etc. to optimize power consumption across campus facilities/equipment through
workload shifting*2, for example, as it examines how to further leverage renewable
energies. Considering the power consumption issues it faces and the HPC*3 cloud
infrastructure and various experimental facilities it has on campus, The University of
Tokyo is the ideal location for a watt-bit collaboration experiment.



  With the drastic increase in power consumption stemming from data centers, etc., and
the increased use of distributed power sources, such as renewable energies, TEPCO PG
must take grid management into the next generation and must find new ways to address
these issues with the participation of its customers rather than merely building more
facilities, as has been done conventionally. Through this initiative we will examine how
to shift workloads over wide areas and between regions to handle inter-university
computing processes and leverage digital twins on campus for cross-sectional
visualization as we aim to develop next-generation transmission and distribution services
that are linked to privately owned facilities, including distributed power sources (watt)
and computing facilities (bit).



   We hope that this collaboration between industry and academia will help to develop
inter-regional university collaboration through watt-bit and we will continue to fulfill our
mission of providing stable supply of power by achieving a watt-bit optimization model.



*1: Carbon footprint

Refers to the conversion into CO2 of the amount of greenhouse causing gasses emitted over the lifetime of an appliance

or service from the procurement of raw materials to manufacturing, transportation, use, and disposal.



*2: Workload Shifting

Method for optimizing the management/control of computer processing (jobs and services) by actively moving them

between data centers, clouds, and edges, and to different time frames, in accordance with conditions such as delays,

cost, electric power (renewable energies) and failure risk, etc..



*3: High Performance Computing

Technologies and systems for the ultra-high-speed processing/computing of large volumes of complicated data by using

computers connected to a network of multiple servers.



[Reference information]

The University of Tokyo Center for Strategic Promotion of GX official website (Japanese only)

https://gx.u-tokyo.ac.jp/

<Attachment>

Watt-Bit Collaboration Project for Green Transformation



                                                                                       End of announcement
