                           Working Document of the NPC Study:
        Arctic Potential: Realizing the Promise of U.S. Arctic Oil and Gas Resources
                               Made Available March 27, 2015




                                   Paper #7-10

       COMMUNICATIONS SOLUTIONS IN
              THE ARCTIC




                                   Prepared for the
                      Technology & Operations Subgroup

                                              	  

On March 27, 2015, the National Petroleum Council (NPC) in approving its report,
Arctic Potential: Realizing the Promise of U.S. Arctic Oil and Gas Resources, also
approved the making available of certain materials used in the study process, including
detailed, specific subject matter papers prepared or used by the study’s Technology
& Operations Subgroup. These Topic Papers were working documents that were part
of the analyses that led to development of the summary results presented in the report’s
Executive Summary and Chapters.

These Topic Papers represent the views and conclusions of the authors. The
National Petroleum Council has not endorsed or approved the statements and
conclusions contained in these documents, but approved the publication of these
materials as part of the study process.

The NPC believes that these papers will be of interest to the readers of the report and
will help them better understand the results. These materials are being made available
in the interest of transparency.

The attached paper is one of 46 such working documents used in the study analyses.
Appendix D of the final NPC report provides a complete list of the 46 Topic Papers.
The full papers can be viewed and downloaded from the report section of the NPC
website (www.npc.org).


	  
       This page is intentionally left blank.




	  
Topic Paper
(Prepared for the National Petroleum Council Study on Research to Facilitate Prudent Arctic Development)



   7-10           Communications Solutions in the Arctic

Author(s)         Martin Stewart (DESIT)

              Dale Farmer (ExxonMobil)
Reviewers     Mitch Winkler (Shell)
              Dennis Warth (Cynergy)
Date: August 13, 2014                  Revision: Final
SUMMARY
Northern Alaska telecommunication capabilities currently include , constraints and technological
recommendations for the future to support Alaskan Arctic OCS explorations and development.



PURPOSE

To provide information on the demand for telecommunications services and bandwidth to
facilitate the technological requirements of today’s resource developments, and the social
and economic needs of communities (education and Health Services) served.



BACKGROUND/ONGOING RESEARCH

There are three primary telecommunications transport methods being utilized in northern Alaska.
These telecommunications facilities or infrastructure make up the backbone of the connections to
the main communication centers in Alaska and the rest of the US.

              •   Satellite - The primary means of transport to the outside world throughout the
                  communities of the Arctic and the OCS, with the exception of the Prudhoe Bay
                  operating area and its associated pipeline corridor. Satellite technology is the
                  primary means of telecommunication transport for the local phone companies,
                  and remote facilities of the resource exploration projects, including the offshore
                  activities. Satellite technologies have improved at a tremendous rate, analogous
                  to the cell phone becoming a smart phone, and satellite capabilities and
                  bandwidth efficiencies have kept pace with demand, which have enhanced and
                  delivered quality services to the exploration offshore activities and will continue
                  to do so.




Logistics and Infrastructure                                                                               1	  
            •   Point to Point Radio (Microwave) - supports the extension of the footprint of
                services from the Satellite earth station or fiber optic facilities to areas requiring
                telecommunication services. This is generally referred to as “last mile
                connectivity”, however where other infrastructure (Roads and Power) are
                available it may be utilized for long hall transport. For example, the Alyeska
                Pipeline supports such a system.
            •   Fiber Optic Connectivity - Currently this method is available via the Pipeline
                corridor and supports the Prudhoe Bay operating areas with much greater
                capacities and speed to satisfy the increasing technological demands for
                telecommunication services.

Outside the Prudhoe Bay operating area Fiber connectivity does not currently exist, nor does
extensive backbones of Microwave radio systems. The communities are not linked together due
to the large expanses of geography between them and the lack of infrastructure (Power, Roads)
to make these connections feasible, therefore the satellite earth station is the primary
telecommunications infrastructure. Off shore, the Satellite (VSAT) technologies supply
untethered IT capabilities that are required in a moving marine environment, and the VSAT does
so with ever increasing efficiencies.

DISCUSSION/POTENTIAL AREAS OF FURTHER RESEARCH

Which technology is utilized in these more remote areas is dependent on many criteria,
economics, time (duration of the telecom requirements), availability of infrastructure (power
utilities) and transport methods (road, marine, aircraft) for accessing the area.

   •   The life cycle of the telecommunication/IT requirement generally has strong influence on
       technologies utilized and the investments made to satisfy either the long term or short
       term needs. As infrastructure develops in a community or demands from a resource
       development project increase the telecommunications technologies deployed will become
       more robust and reliable.
   •   These technologies require forethought and planning as construction cycles are long in
       the Arctic, very seasonal, and with short windows of opportunities to accomplish physical
       construction and implementation of telecommunication facilities. This timing constraint
       is profoundly evident in the offshore drilling were Weather, Ice, and Regulation dictate a
       short seasonal cycle(100 days or less), and robust and redundant VSAT systems are
       deployed for reliable delivery and safe operations.

The Telecommunications Industry has strived to provide “ubiquitous” services throughout the
US and the world, and the technologies deployed have for the most part delivered this and
become what we expect in today’s world.




Logistics and Infrastructure                                                                             2	  
   •   The current communications infrastructure in the Arctic does not integrate well into this
       modern broadband world as the infrastructure to support them is limited (exception-
       Prudhoe Bay OA), and the opportunities for further development of Telecommunication
       facilities (Fiber Optic connectivity, Long hall Microwave networks) are economically
       challenging and require significant infrastructure to support.
   •   The efficient integration of these technologies linking the Arctic communities to each
       other and resource projects to the broadband world are challenged not only by regulatory
       and fiscal constraints, but also by physical constraints of the arctic environment.

Key considerations for improvement include:

           •   Power. A subject by itself, but telecommunications facilities require power
               (sustained, and reliable) for both permanent (long term) and temporary
               (seasonal/short term) requirements.
                   o When there is a requirement for facilities to link projects or communities
                        in the Artic that span vast amounts of geography, the ability to provide
                        sustained power at remote sites (relay/repeater towers etc) is usually the
                        show-stopper for the development of such a system. The ability to
                        provide sustained power is not feasible without infrastructure (roads
                        and/or utilities).
           •   Transportation Corridors. Significantly aid in the development of communication
               facilities, a good example being the Prudhoe Bay OA.
                   o These corridors generally lead to and connect to the facilities requiring
                        telecommunication services, and these facilities meet the sustained power
                        requirement as well.
                   o Corridors also ease access requirements for the construction and
                        deployment of the various telecommunication technologies and facilities.
                   o Corridors generally are a pathway for utility distribution (power, and
                        telecommunications )
                   o Corridors generally indicate long term requirements versus seasonal or
                        temporary activities.
           •   All three Telecommunication transport methodologies described above have
               similar and unique environmental hurdles in the Arctic.
                   o Fiber Optic cable, being the least mature in its application and deployment
                        in both the Arctic waters and terrestrially across lands of permafrost,
                        provide for unique challenges.
                   o Microwave and Satellite have similar issues terrestrially, but have been
                        dealt with and engineered for many years, however they both have
                        technological issues unique to the Arctic as well to include
                        electromagnetic variations affecting performance, more pronounced sun
                        spot outages, and satellite grazing (look) angles.


Logistics and Infrastructure                                                                     3	  
                   o Satellite usage off shore, especially as we operate in the far northern
                     latitudes, begins to degrade in its reliability(up time) due to extreme low
                     look angle to the satellite itself.
                   o Satellite low look angle and the ever present fog (high moisture) effects
                     signal efficiencies (degradation of through put), although somewhat rare
                     when it happens there is little that can be done about it.
                   o The Arctic is only supported by a few satellites that have spot beams
                     (footprints) that provide coverage. Generally the Arctic is on the outer
                     edge of these coverage areas and this limits available bandwidth both
                     technologically and the number of satellite transponder providers.
                     Transponder coverage also affects the satellite antenna size utilized on the
                     vessels and as this coverage improves the ability to utilize smaller
                     antennas (dishes) becomes feasible; important where precious deck space
                     is typically an issue.

While these challenges present a few of the obstacles facing the provisioning of the integrated
telecommunications model “ubiquitous services” there is movement towards solutions on the
horizon. Several Telecommunications providers are promoting plans to extend services from
Anchorage and Fairbanks to the Arctic coast. One provider has extended their Fiber network
from Anchorage to Alaska’s west Coast (Bristol Bay) and extended its broadband services
further up the west coast utilizing long hall microwave facilities to Kotzebue. Others are
planning to lay Fiber optic cables up the west arctic coast and across the NW passage.

The satellite industry continues to make significant improvements in both the availability of
spectrum and the technologies to facilitate maximizing the amount of information that can be
transferred. VSATs today provide the ability to supply real time information from offshore
operations such as real time drilling information, operational video, etc., while simultaneously
delivering voice (telephone), data and internet functionality safely and with unprecedented
reliability. In the not too distant past a couple of 64kbps circuits for telephone and facsimile
were a luxury to operators. Today’s VSAT delivers upwards of 2-3Mbps of
bandwidth/throughput, and as spectrum and coverage in the Arctic increase we can expect the
VSAT technologies to deliver an ever increasing amount service supporting the technological
demands of modern exploration activities safely and efficiently.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Enhanced telecommunications capabilities in northern Alaska would benefit from:

   •   The availability of the broadband services.
          o The development of these telecommunication facilities will link communities and
              bring the necessary broadband bandwidth to enable them to participate in
              capabilities similar to the rest of the US.



Logistics and Infrastructure                                                                       4	  
            o Economically. The development of a suitable Telecommunications infrastructure
                will require a “coordinated (Industry, Federal, State and Local) investment
                decisions”.
    •   Prudent investment in Arctic Telecommunication Solutions will provide the linking of
        communities across the Arctic coast to the broadband networks in Anchorage and the rest
        of the US.
            o The Arctic Telecommunications challenge provides opportunities to Industry,
                Federal, State and Local Governments and Academia to develop, test, and utilize
                modern, cutting edge and exploratory technologies.
            o This investment would enhance operational safety during exploration and
                development phases of OCS oil and gas activity and the peoples of Alaska while
                enhancing the protection of the Arctic environment.
Prepared by: Martin Stewart
Organization: DESIT ,LLC Anchorage Alaska
Mjspa18@gmail.com
Martin.stewart@shell.com
Office Phone: 907-646-7102




Logistics and Infrastructure                                                                  5	  
