            What is seen and shared in the IT System – a quick
            overview




Gateway in CYRAS and at the DHB                                  1
           How to create a referral on
           CYRAS
           • All children entering care must be referred for a
             Gateway assessment. If the child has been referred
             to FGC or had already had an FGC, consider if a
             Gateway referral would be helpful
           • Check if the child has had a Gateway referral recently
             to reduce duplicates
          • To start the process go to
            here




Gateway in CYRAS and at the DHB                                       2
          • Involve the child as a participant




           • Then go to the Referral Details tab




Gateway in CYRAS and at the DHB                    3
           Completing the referral

                                     You must put in a
                                     referral Category.
                                     Once you have
                                     referred the child,
                                     the DHB can see
                                     the information in
                                     this drop down
                                     box.

                                     Entry to Care is
                                     for when the
                                     referral is
                                     because the child
                                     is entering Care –
                                     the policy is that
                                     child will be
                                     referred within 10
                                     days of entry.




Gateway in CYRAS and at the DHB                            4
           When an exemption to the gateway referral policy for
           a child entering care is needed




                                  If a child is entering care, but a decision is made not to refer, then
                                  enter the most appropriate reason here. Note the requirement for
                                  consultation with DHB and Education for the first option.

                                  If consent isn’t given, then the referral cannot take place unless you
                                  go to court and get an appropriate order for it to occur.


Gateway in CYRAS and at the DHB                                                                            5
           Entering the consent status

                                  Enter the consent type that you have obtained.

                                  The DHB can see what you put in this section when the referral has
                                  been completed. You can also see any changes the DHB has made.
                                  (Note: To attach the pdf of the written consent this is done on the
                                  Outcome Tab after the “Refer Now” has been pushed)




Gateway in CYRAS and at the DHB                                                                         6
           Education Profile request


                          The request for the education profile is here. There is a template that you can
                          create and edit. It has some sections that are prepopulated. Select the appropriate
                          type, fill in the gaps, and then email it or post it to the relevant person in education.
                          It can be helpful if the DHB is copied into this correspondence.




                                                                  If needed, you can record that an education profile isn’t being
                                                                  requested. This should only be done if there isn’t value in an
                                                                  education profile – for example for a baby who hasn’t attended
                                                                  ECE.

Gateway in CYRAS and at the DHB                                                                                                     7
           Making the referral to the DHB


                                  Fill out the template provided. Quality here is important as the information here is
                                  central to the child having a meaningful assessment at the DHB. You can cut and
                                  paste relevant information from other documents.




                                                                              Once you have completed the templates then select
                                                                              the DHB and then push the “Refer Now” button. As
                                                                              soon as you have pushed Refer Now the referral is
                                                                              at the DHB. You now need to go to the “Outcome”
                                                                              Tab to upload the written consent documents PDF



Gateway in CYRAS and at the DHB                                                                                               8
           Adding the consent document and
           sharing documents with the DHB




                                  Move to the “Outcome” tab as soon has you have pushed “Refer Now”

                                  This is a place where the documents that are uploaded in Gateway can be seen instantly
                                  both on CYRAS and at the DHB on their IT tool.

                                  Push “Add” and then use the drop down box under “Category” to choose “Other Files”.
                                  Browse and attach the PDF of the written consent. As soon as they are uploaded they can
                                  be viewed at the DHB.

                                  It is here that you will be able to see the education profile, health report and ISA
                                  documents once they are uploaded at the DHB. You are not sent a reminder that this has
                                  happened.
Gateway in CYRAS and at the DHB                                                                                             9
           What the DHB can see   Name and
                                  some basic
                                  information




                                  The Consent
                                  status that you
                                  entered on
                                  CYRAS


                                  Shared
                                  documents
                                  including:
                                  • written
                                     consent,
                                  • your referral,
                                  • completed
                                     education
                                     profile,
                                  • heath
                                     assessment
                                  • Interagency
                                     Services
                                     Agreement
Gateway in CYRAS and at the DHB                      10
