                                       Executive Summary
                         Alaska’s Railbelt Electric System:
                       Decarbonization Scenarios For 2050
Phylicia Cicilio1 , Jeremy VanderMeer1 , Steve Colt1 , Alexis Francisco1 , Emilia Sakai
    Hernandez1 , Cameron Morelli1 , Michelle Wilber1 , Chris Pike1 , Derek Stenclik2 ,
     Matthew Richwine2 , Christopher Cox2 , Isabela Anselmo2 , and Kelsey Ciemny2
              1 Alaska Center for Energy and Power, University of Alaska, Fairbanks
                                                                        2 Telos Energy
Technical Report
UAF/ACEP/TP-01-0003
January 2024

Suggested Citation:
P. Cicilio et al., "Alaska’s Railbelt Electric System: Decarbonization Scenarios for 2050," Alaska
Center for Energy and Power, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, 2023. UAF/ACEP/TP-01-0003.
AddLink.edu
DOI:10.5281/zenodo.10520544




                                                2
                                                          Notice
The University of Alaska Fairbanks is an affirmative action/equal opportunity employer and educational institu-
tion. UAF does not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, citizenship, age, sex, physical
or mental disability, status as a protected veteran, marital status, changes in marital status, pregnancy, childbirth or
related medical conditions, parenthood, sexual orientation, gender identity, political affiliation or belief, genetic in-
formation, or other legally protected status. The University’s commitment to nondiscrimination, including against
sex discrimination, applies to students, employees, and applicants for admission and employment. Contact informa-
tion, applicable laws, and complaint procedures are included on UA’s statement of nondiscrimination available at
www.alaska.edu/nondiscrimination/.
This report is available at no cost from the Alaska Center for Energy and Power (ACEP) at the University of Alaska,
Fairbanks (UAF) at www.uaf.edu/acep/our-resources/index.php.
This template is based off of the National Renewable Energy Laboratory Report Template, which is available at no
cost at www.nrel.gov/comm-standards/editorial/report-template.html.
Cover Photo courtesy of Golden Valley Electric Association.




                                                             iii

                  This report is available at no cost from the Alaska Center for Energy and Power (ACEP) at
                   the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF) at www.uaf.edu/acep/our-resources/index.php
Acknowledgments
This work was made possible with support from numerous organizations and individuals through collaboration,
input, data, and review as part of our technical advisory group. The analyses and interpretations presented in this
report are the authors’ alone. The reviewers provided ongoing feedback throughout the project but the views in the
report are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views of reviewers or their employers.
    • Alaska Energy Authority: Bryan Carey
    • Chugach Electric Association: Dustin Highers, Hans Thompson, Mark Henspeter
    • Golden Valley Electric Association: Dan Bishop
    • Homer Electric Association: Larry Jorgensen, David Thomas
    • Matanuska Electric Association
    • Bradley Lake Project Management Committee: Brian Hickey
The authors also thank the following organization and individuals for their contributions through input, data, and
comments:
    • Information Insights Inc.: Jamie Hansen, Frana Burtness-Adams, and Lisa Baraff
    • Alaska Microgrid Group: Brian Rogers
    • Alaska Renewables LLC: Matthew Perkins and Andrew McDonnell
    • Analysis North: Alan Mitchell
    • Mark A. Foster, MAFA
    • David Lockard
    • Those who contributed at the Stakeholder Workshop and completed the Stakeholder Survey
    • City of Seward, Alaska: Rob Montgomery
The following individuals from the Alaska Center for Energy and Power are also thanked and acknowledged for their
comments and review throughout the process: Glen Woodworth, Ian MacDougall, Mariko Shirazi, Erin Trochim,
Mohammad Heidari Kapourchali, Vanessa Raymond, Andrew Miles, Gwen Holdmann, Jeremy Kasper, and Peter
Asmus. We are grateful to Fran Pedersen for her enthusiastic offer of editing and were saddened that she could not
see the study to its end.
This project is part of the Arctic Regional Collaboration for Technology Innovation and Commercialization II Pro-
gram - Innovation Network, an initiative supported by the Office of Naval Research (ONR) Award N00014-22-1-
2049. This project is funded by state of Alaska fiscal year 2023 economic development capital funding. Additionally,
this project has been supported by the Hawai’i Natural Energy Institute.




                                                            iv

                 This report is available at no cost from the Alaska Center for Energy and Power (ACEP) at
                  the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF) at www.uaf.edu/acep/our-resources/index.php
Table of Contents
    Acknowledgments       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   iv
1   Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        1
    1.1  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      1
    1.2  Overview of Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           1
    1.3  Methodology Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           4
    1.4  Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        5
         1.4.1 Transmission Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           6
         1.4.2 Economic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             7
   1.5 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          7
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      11




List of Figures
Figure 1.1    Alaska Railbelt transmission, load regions, and electric utility territories . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2
Figure 1.2    Project components flowchart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        3
Figure 1.3    Scenario overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       5
Figure 1.4 Summary of the cost of service, by component and scenario, under four sensitivity cases, in 2023
     $ per MWh generated. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         8




List of Tables
Table 1.1    Summary of generation and transmission cost of service relative to Business-as-Usual scenario . .            7
Table 1.2    Summary of Resources in the Current System and the Scenarios developed in this Study . . . . . .             9




                                                             v

                  This report is available at no cost from the Alaska Center for Energy and Power (ACEP) at
                   the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF) at www.uaf.edu/acep/our-resources/index.php
1    Executive Summary
1.1 Introduction
The Railbelt is the largest regional electric grid in Alaska, spanning approximately 700 miles from Fairbanks to
Homer, as seen in Figure 1.1.

The goal of this study is to explore and quantify decarbonization scenarios of Alaska’s Railbelt electric grid by the
year 2050. This study evaluates these decarbonization scenarios for reliability and affordability. These decarboniza-
tion scenarios are designed to be illustrative of potential 2050 decarbonized futures, and are not predictions of the
future or suggestions of optimal pathways. This project has the scope of a pre-feasibility study, which is an early
stage of analysis valuable for evaluating the technical viability of the decarbonization scenarios proposed.

This project aims to provide valuable information to the Alaskan public and decision makers on the economic and re-
liability implications of several decarbonization scenarios and to demonstrate methods for evaluating Railbelt energy
transitions. Additionally, a key intention of this work has been to build capacity within Alaska to perform the types
of analyses needed to evaluate energy transitions. The information generated from this study includes general infor-
mation such as resource availability and load forecasts, and information specific to the developed decarbonization
scenarios such as stability and reliability of the system, and the impact to rates.

The outcomes of this study include:

    • Evaluate various resource mixes and quantities necessary to meet high-decarbonization objectives in the
      Railbelt,

    • Quantify the electric load impacts of electrification, including high electric vehicle and heat pump adoption,

    • Characterize the operational and reliability implications of decarbonization scenarios,

    • Quantify the potential capital costs and operational costs of a decarbonized power system,

    • Create information for Railbelt planning discussions and future studies, such as an Integrated Resource Plan,

    • Train students, staff, and faculty at the University of Alaska Fairbanks in the tools and methods to study energy
      transitions, including through the mentorship and collaboration of national and local industry experts.

1.2 Overview of Methods
To evaluate the changes to power system operations and grid stability with increasing renewable energy and elec-
trification, this analysis leveraged detailed power system simulation and modeling software. In total, four scenarios
were evaluated, identified in Section 3, to represent potential future power systems with increased clean energy. Grid
configurations were evaluated with additions of wind, solar, tidal, battery energy storage, hydro, and nuclear tech-
nologies as well as corresponding fossil-fuel generator retirements and additions and increased electrification from
vehicles and heat pumps. The software tools used in this analysis are available from third-party software vendors
heavily used throughout the industry, and are the same ones leveraged by the Railbelt utilities and other global utili-
ties. These grid planning tools allow for evaluation and simulation of a future power system using the same methods
and processes used to operate and control today’s grid to isolate the effects of integrating renewable energy, new
technology, and operational changes. When it comes to power system modeling, no one tool can provide a com-
prehensive analysis across the generation, transmission, and distribution segments of utility planning. In addition,
no one tool can properly evaluate all the timescales of planning, which range from sub-seconds to an entire year,
or years, of operation. To overcome this limitation, this study leveraged multiple power system planning tools with
tight coupling between the different stages. This allows for each tool to properly evaluate its domain, while linking
inputs, assumptions, and outputs between the tools to overcome seams in the analysis typically found between the
generation and transmission analyses.




                                                            1

                 This report is available at no cost from the Alaska Center for Energy and Power (ACEP) at
                  the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF) at www.uaf.edu/acep/our-resources/index.php
    Figure 1.1. Alaska Railbelt transmission, load regions, and electric utility territories




                                               2

This report is available at no cost from the Alaska Center for Energy and Power (ACEP) at
 the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF) at www.uaf.edu/acep/our-resources/index.php
                                                 Figure 1.2. Project components flowchart

The study utilized a six-step, interconnected process, as outlined in Figure 1.2:

   1. Scenario Development: Several scenarios were identified that highlighted different energy resources while
      including significant integration of wind and solar energy, to illustrate unique pathways to decarbonization.
      These scenarios were refined through public engagement and feedback during the early stages of the project.

   2. Resource Assessment: The energy resources considered in this study were identified by high resource avail-
      ability near the existing Railbelt transmission system. The hourly availability of each new energy resource was
      collected for many locations of new generation.

   3. Load Forecasting and Electrification: The Alaska Center for Energy and Power project team developed
      a load forecast for the Alaska Railbelt following current trends for electric load growth and the impact of
      electrification of other energy sectors, namely transportation and heating. Following best industry practice,
      the load forecast was developed for multiple layers, including an underlying economic forecast, rooftop solar
      photovoltaics, electric vehicles, and heat pump adoption. This allowed for multiple forecasts to be developed
      to represent different levels of end use electrification.

   4. Generation Analysis: Generation analysis involves both portfolio optimization and production cost analysis.

           • Portfolio Optimization: Using the load forecast developed in Step 1, future generation portfolios were
             developed with a custom-built portfolio optimization tool that selected resource combinations of wind,
             solar, battery storage, tidal and nuclear resources to meet future demand.

           • Production Cost Analysis: The analysis utilized Energy Exemplar’s PLEXOS production cost model
             to quantify hour-to-hour operation of the grid to match load and generation in a least cost manner while
             meeting reliability constraints like regulation reserves, contingency reserves, and transmission constraints
             based on the initial economic capacity sizing, load forecasts, and energy resource information including
             availability and operating costs. The model incorporated reserves requirements specified in the Alaska
             Reliability Standards1 which were modified to account for high penetrations of variable renewable
             resources based on methods employed in other regions of the United States that currently have greater
             penetrations of variable renewable energy resources.2 The output from the model used in this study is an
    1 The Intertie Management Committees’ Railbelt Operating and Reliability Standards. Oct. 2017. URL : https://www.akenergyauthority.org/

Portals/0/Programs/Railbelt%20Energy/Alaska%20Inertie/RailbeltOpratingRlbilityStndardsFinal2017.pdf?ver=2019-06-19-135947-740 (visited
on 10/29/2023).
    2 Bartlett, Drake and Parks, Keith. 2020 Study of the Levels of Flex Reserve and Regulating Reserve Necessary for Reliable System Operation




                                                                       3
                     This report is available at no cost from the Alaska Center for Energy and Power (ACEP) at
                      the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF) at www.uaf.edu/acep/our-resources/index.php
             hourly time series of the dispatch of existing and new generation resources in the system. It is important
             to note that the generation dispatch created assumed a single load balancing entity or transmission system
             operator, resulting in optimal dispatch for the system as a whole.

   5. Transmission Stability Analysis: The analysis utilized Siemens’ Power System Simulator for Engineering
      (PSS®E) power flow modeling software to evaluate steady-state and dynamic stability on the transmission
      network (from 69 kV to 230 kV voltage levels). This was built from the current PSS®E model of the Rail-
      belt, representing the present-day system. The existing PSS®E model was adapted to represent each of the
      scenarios using the resource sizes and locations, load forecasts, and economic dispatch generated in earlier
      steps. Stability and reliability analyses were performed in PSS®Efollowing key provisions of the Alaska Reli-
      ability Standard AKTPL-001-2. Grid upgrades, including transmission, grid-forming inverter batteries, shunt
      capacitors, and synchronous condensers were identified to maintain voltage and frequency stability.

   6. Economic Analysis: The cost of service to provide electricity on the Railbelt was determined for the system
      build for each scenario based on 1) the capital cost of new generation, transmission upgrades, and additional
      equipment or system upgrades necessary for system stability; and 2) the operating costs (fuel, variable and
      fixed operations and maintenance) of executing the hourly dispatch determined by the PLEXOS production
      cost model. The average cost per MWh of distribution and general and administrative was assumed to remain
      constant at current levels. Margins were included as an element of the cost of service to determine average
      revenue requirements per MWh.

1.3 Methodology Limitations
The analysis performed in this study has several methodology limitations discussed here. These kinds of limitations
are inherent to a pre-feasibility study, which is only as good as the input assumptions and simplifications.

    • Load Forecast and Cost Assumptions: The load forecast is generated using the best available data and
      information at the time of this study. Similarly, the generation analysis and rate analysis are performed using
      cost assumptions based on the best available data and information at the time of this study. The assumptions
      made in this study are outlined throughout the report and appendices. However, as policies change and new
      data becomes available both the load forecast and cost assumptions will be out of date. Future work will need
      to reevaluate and generate a new load forecast and cost assumptions.

    • Stability Analysis Tool (PSS®E): The power system simulation tool used in this study is PSS®E. This is
      a common type of a power system simulator for evaluating large power systems at the level of detail for a
      planning study. This tool can accurately identify key stability challenges that are likely to create issues and
      that will require mitigation. For detailed implementation studies and for small sections of electric grids with
      high amounts of inverter-based resources, electromagnetic transient simulations are necessary, such simula-
      tions were beyond the scope of this report. For the level of analysis needed for this study, the simulation tool
      PSS®Eprovides informative results that identify key stability challenges. Additional details on the limitations
      and uses of the analysis tools and models employed are provided in Section 6.




while Accommodating the Uncertainty of Wind and Solar Generation at Varying Levels of Installed Wind and Solar Generation Capacity within
the Public Service Company of Colorado Balancing Area Authority. en. Tech. rep. Public Service Company of Colorado, May 2022, p. 26. URL:
https://www.xcelenergy.com/staticfiles/xe- responsive/Company/Rates%20&%20Regulations/Resource%20Plans/Clean%20Energy%20Plan/
HE_114-KLS-3-Flex_Reserve_Study.pdf; Paul Denholm et al. “Summary of Market Opportunities for Electric Vehicles and Dispatchable Load in
Electrolyzers”. In: (May 2015). DOI: 10.2172/1215243. URL: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1215243.


                                                                   4

                    This report is available at no cost from the Alaska Center for Energy and Power (ACEP) at
                     the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF) at www.uaf.edu/acep/our-resources/index.php
Scenarios
This study evaluated four scenarios, each of which considers large, fundamentally different resource mixes to
achieve similar decarbonization objectives. Scenarios are based on a target 2050 study year and are summarized
in Figure 1.3.




                                               Figure 1.3. Scenario overview

1.4 Key Findings
The key findings from each type of analysis, as outlined in Figure 1.2, are provided below.

Generation Analysis

    • Wind and solar are the cheapest sources of energy, but the cost of curtailment and energy storage lim-
      ited their installed capacity. For the range of costs considered in the system sizing sensitivity analysis, wind
      and solar resources provided the lowest cost energy. However, they were not able to supply the full load and
      reliability needs of the system. In all scenarios, some amount of curtailment of wind and solar energy was
      necessary. In cases with high levels of curtailment the capital costs of wind and solar generation become pro-
      hibitively expensive. While lithium-ion batteries can mitigate some curtailment for use later, it is a relatively
      expensive upgrade.

    • Fossil-fuel and hydro power generation are more flexible and operate alongside variable wind and solar
      generation, while nuclear generation is better suited to supply baseload power. Our analysis showed that
      the system could not be decarbonized using only variable renewable resources, such as wind and solar power.
      Some amount of a firm source of generation is still required for sufficient generation to be available. With the
      technologies considered in this study, fossil-fuel and hydro power generation were the most cost effective firm
      sources to pair with variable renewables. When nuclear generation was built into system sizing sensitivity
      analysis scenarios, it displaced both renewable and fossil-fuel sources of generation and was more expensive.

    • Inclusion of nuclear or tidal generation in system sizing sensitivity analysis scenarios depended on their
      cost projections. Nuclear and tidal generation were not built in all system sizing sensitivity analysis scenarios
      due to their projected costs. There is significant uncertainty in the projected costs and future commercial
      availability of these technologies.

    • In the low-carbon scenarios, 70 - 96% of generation came from zero-carbon sources. The rest came from
      fossil-fuel sources of generation. With the technologies and cost projections considered in this study, achieving
      100% fossil-free generation would have been more expensive than the low-carbon scenarios. Carbon capture
      and storage are not 100% effective, and including it would still not result in 100% decarbonization. Other
      potential options for this could include repowering with hydrogen, biofuels, synthetic fuels, or using direct air
      capture all of which have similar challenges.

    • The low-carbon scenarios represent a significant change in system operation compared to the Business-
      as-Usual scenario and current day operation. Due to the variable nature of wind, solar, and tidal energy,


                                                            5

                 This report is available at no cost from the Alaska Center for Energy and Power (ACEP) at
                  the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF) at www.uaf.edu/acep/our-resources/index.php
        a high degree of flexibility must be readily available from firm sources of power. Fossil-fuel, hydropower,
        battery storage, and nuclear sources are leveraged to various degrees to meet this need. This results in a signifi-
        cant increase in the flexibility required from fossil-fuel sources to be able to serve unscheduled load compared
        to the Business-as-Usual scenario and what is possible in the current system. This flexibility from thermal
        generators will also increase the flexibility needed from natural gas fuel production and transportation. The
        flexibility to be expected from a liquefied natural gas import scenario in 2050 is not known and may be more
        than is in the current gas system on the Railbelt. This flexibility in natural gas production and transportation
        does not exist under current natural gas tariffs.

    • Increased transmission capacity allows greater power sharing between regions. The capacities of the
      Alaska and Kenai Interties were increased to allow 300 MW in the low-carbon scenarios from 140 MW and
      78 MW in the Business-as-Usual scenario. The increased transmission allowed large projects such as Susitna-
      Watana hydro, nuclear power plants, and Cook Inlet tidal to power loads across the Railbelt. It also allowed
      variable wind, solar, and tidal resource sites of wind, solar, and tidal, spread over the hundreds of miles of the
      Railbelt grid, to help balance each other and deliver net generation with a lower degree of variability in each
      region. However, the economic value of transmission upgrades was not analyzed in this study to determine if
      they resulted in a lower cost system compared to a low-carbon scenario without the upgrades.

1.4.1   Transmission Analysis

    • Grid reliability services must be provided by inverter-based resources as well as the remaining syn-
      chronous machinery. The reliability services like inertia and grid strength that have historically been supplied
      by online synchronous machinery must still be provided for the grid to be stable and reliable. With inverter-
      based resources displacing the synchronous resources for thousands of hours each year in the future scenarios,
      it is critical that inverter-based resources provide sufficient levels of these services to enable the decommitment
      and/or retirement of fossil-fuel plants. Section 6 analyzes how to use battery storage and other resources to
      maintain system stability during different contingencies.

    • Improvements in inverter algorithms used on the Railbelt grid will be essential for future grid stability.
      The grid-forming inverter technology applied to battery energy storage system resources plays a critical role
      in the stability of the future system. It is important that the grid-forming inverter battery energy storage sys-
      tem resources are sized and distributed appropriately throughout the future system. The use of grid-forming
      inverter technology on battery energy storage systems in combination with the most advanced grid-following
      inverter technology for utility-scale wind and solar plants is instrumental in providing stability to the grid.
      These technologies enable the system to survive not only separation events, but also to reduce reliance on the
      under-frequency load-shedding scheme, resulting in a more resilient grid. Grid-forming inverter technology
      is an emerging technology and more deployments, testing, and incremental grid-forming inverter technology
      additions would need to be made to enable the successful broad deployment of this technology in the Railbelt
      as simulated in this study.

    • System stability is more difficult to achieve in low-carbon scenarios. This is due to the displacement of
      much of the thermal synchronous generators by inverter-based resources and/or the addition of particularly
      large plants that could constitute a new most severe single contingency, such as Susitna-Watana hydro.

    • The losses of the interties were the most severe contingencies. This is because the losses of the interties
      results in either the Northern or Southern regions being synchronously or fully isolated from the rest of the
      system, with all generation in the isolated region being required to respond fast enough and with enough
      system strength for the region to operate independently. The high-voltage direct current line allows power
      transfer between the Central and Southern regions, but does not synchronously connect the two regions.
      Therefore, when the Kenai Intertie is lost, only the high voltage direct current line connects the Southern and
      Central regions, and that does not transfer the inertia or system strength from the Central region to the South
      region. The ability of the Northern and Southern regions to operate isolated from the rest of the system is
      critical, and is limited by the inertia and system strength available in those regions.

    • Significant steady-state voltage issues in low-carbon scenarios. These voltage violations were due to 1)


                                                              6

                   This report is available at no cost from the Alaska Center for Energy and Power (ACEP) at
                    the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF) at www.uaf.edu/acep/our-resources/index.php
        an increased load, 2) new locations of large resources (such as wind, hydro, and/or nuclear) increasing power
        flows across the two main interties and other transmission lines across the system, and 3) reduction in power
        generation from fossil-fuel generators near load centers reducing the available reactive power injection. These
        voltage violations were mitigated with the addition of shunt capacitors and batteries to provide reactive power;
        however other measures could be considered to reduce the demand for reactive power and voltage support, for
        instance, reducing the size of Homer Wind or distributing it to two different points of interconnection.

     • Stability considerations must be included when siting new generation. For example, the large wind facility
       at Homer Wind was the main cause of the voltage and thermal violations in the Southern region for all low-
       carbon scenarios. Reducing the size of Homer Wind or locating the wind facility in the Southern region closer
       to the 230kV Kenai Intertie could have resolved or reduced this issue.

1.4.2   Economic Analysis

     • The required capital investment to implement the low-carbon scenarios, after application of allowed
       investment tax credit amounts, ranges from about 8 billion to about 12 billion in 2023 dollars under
       base case assumptions. These are large amounts, in part because significantly higher Alaska-specific capital
       and operations and maintenance costs were assumed, and in part because some specific high-cost projects
       were added to scenarios without first passing an economic screening test. These high up-front costs would be
       repaid through rates over the economic life of each project. For example, the annualized capital cost of the
       most capital-intensive scenario (Wind/Solar/Hydro) in 2050 would be about $630 million (for generation). By
       comparison, the annual fuel expense in 2050 under the Business-as-Usual scenario is $745 million.

     • The cost of service for the low-carbon scenarios, after application of allowed investment tax credit subsi-
       dies, differs by -5% to 25% from the Business-as-Usual scenario depending on varying fuel costs, hydro
       and nuclear capital costs, and interest rates. Table 1.1 provides a numerical summary of the economic
       analysis. Under base case assumptions, which include a year 2050 natural gas price of $14/MMBtu (in 2023
       dollars) and Alaska-specific (thus relatively high) capital and fixed operations and maintenance costs, the gen-
       eration and transmission cost of service for the low-carbon scenarios ranges from 7% to 12% higher than for
       the Business-as-Usual scenario. However, if fuel prices were 20% higher (case S2), the low-carbon scenarios
       would cost from 5% less to the same as Business-as-Usual, all else being equal. Similarly, if the interest rate
       and capital costs of the hydro, tidal, and nuclear projects were 20% lower (case S4), the low-carbon scenarios
       would cost from 3% less to 1% more than the Business-as-Usual scenario.
              Table 1.1. Summary of generation and transmission cost of service relative to Business-as-Usual scenario

             Cost Sensitivity Scenario            Wind/Solar/Hydro             Wind/Solar/Tidal            Wind/Solar/Nuclear
             Base                                 12%                          8%                          7%
             S1 High Fuel                         0%                           -1%                         -5%
             S2 High interest                     18%                          10%                         12%
             S3 High-cost renewables              25%                          14%                         18%
             S4 Low-cost renewables               1%                           1%                          -3%

        However, if interest rates and/or the capital costs of renewables were 20% higher than base case levels, the
        generation and transmission cost of the low-carbon scenarios could exceed that of Business-as-Usual by 18%
        to 25%3 .

1.5 Conclusion
This study evaluates several decarbonization scenarios of the Railbelt electric grid in Alaska for the year 2050.
The scenarios are meant to be illustrative examples as a pre-feasibility study, highlighting the ability of certain
resources and resource mixes to create a low-carbon electric grid for evaluation based on affordability and reliability.
   3 When considering these percentages, it is important to remember that a 25% percent increase in the cost of generation and transmission

would not result in a 25% increase in the overall cost of service, because other cost components (distribution, customer accounts, administration)
would likely remain constant across all four scenarios).




                                                                         7

                      This report is available at no cost from the Alaska Center for Energy and Power (ACEP) at
                       the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF) at www.uaf.edu/acep/our-resources/index.php
Additional analysis is necessary for implementation of new resources, technologies, and transmission. What is
presented in this work is neither a prediction of the future or a suggestion of an optimal low-carbon future.

This project provides valuable information to the Alaskan public and decision makers on the economic and reliability
implications of several decarbonization scenarios and to demonstrate methods for evaluation of Railbelt energy tran-
sitions. Additionally, a key intention of this work has been to build capacity within Alaska to perform the types of
analysis needed to evaluate energy transitions. The information generated from this study includes general informa-
tion such as resource availability and load forecasts, information specific to the developed decarbonization scenarios
such as stability and reliability of the system, and the impact to rates.

Through a multi-stage analysis process the project performed resource analysis to determine availability and sizing,
load forecasting, economic dispatch of generation, stability analysis, and economic analysis. The accumulation
of this analysis results in a set of resources for each scenario. The complete collection of resources in each of the
scenarios is compiled in Table 1.2.

Economic analysis, including the assessment of capital costs, fuel costs, operations and maintenance costs, and fi-
nancing, provides insight into the potential cost implications of these scenarios. The cost of service for each scenario
was calculated, and is presented in Figure 1.4.




Figure 1.4. Summary of the cost of service, by component and scenario, under four sensitivity cases, in 2023 $ per MWh generated.


                                                               8

                  This report is available at no cost from the Alaska Center for Energy and Power (ACEP) at
                   the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF) at www.uaf.edu/acep/our-resources/index.php
             Table 1.2. Summary of Resources in the Current System and the Scenarios developed in this Study

                                                        Current               Wind/Solar/      Wind/Solar/     Wind/Solar/
Resource Type                  Resource                              BAU
                                                        System                  Hydro            Tidal          Nuclear*
                                                                               459-608
                    Susitna-Watana                          –          –                              –            –
                                                                                 ****
                 Grant Lake                                 –          –           5                 5               5
Hydro
                 Bradley Lake                             120         120         120               120            120
                 Eklutna Lake                              40          40          40               40              40
                 Cooper Lake                              19.4        19.4       19.4              19.4            19.4
                 Delta                                     1.9        1.9          50                7              50
                 Eva Creek                                24.6        24.6         74               132            160
                 Fire Island                               18          18          36               18              36
Wind             Homer                                      –          –          213               231            285
                 Houston                                    –          –          185               165             49
                 Little Mount Susitna                       –          30         315               214            265
                 Shovel Creek                               –          –          223               231            285
                 Fairbanks                                0.56         1           1                 1               1
                 Houston                                   8.5        8.5          45               33              30
                 Nenana                                     –          –           45               66              60
Solar PV
                 Point Mackenzie                            –          –           90               33              30
                 Sterling                                   –          –          255               33              96
                 Willow                                   1.20         –           45               33              30
                 Northern                                ∼5**         43.3       43.3              43.3            43.3
Residential
                 Central                                 ∼10**       139.9      139.9              139.9          139.9
Solar PV
                 Southern                                ∼4**         44.3       44.3              44.3            44.3
Tidal            Cook Inlet                                 –          –           –                400              –
                 Healy                                      –          –           –                 –             231
Nuclear
                 Beluga                                     –          –           –                 –             308
                 Coal                                     114          54           -                -               -
                 Natural Gas/Naphtha powered
                                                           495       1,095         495               495          495
Fossil-Fuel      Combined Cycle (CC)
                 Natural Gas powered
                                                           171        171          171               171          171
                 internal combustion (IC)
                 Natural Gas powered
                                                           468        568          468               872          468
                 combustion turbines (CT)
                 Oil power generation                     198         198          198               198           198
                 30-minute                                 27          50          808               390          1,117
                 2-hr                                     46.5       146.5         282               227           287
Li-ion Batteries
                 4-hr                                       -          70           70               70             70
                 6-hr                                       -           -          300               280           261
Synchronous Condensers                                    ***           -            -               358            90
Shunt Capacitors                                          ***           -           91               75            185
* The Wind/Solar/Nuclear scenario assumes that naphtha, or an equivalent priced fuel, replaces natural gas.
** Estimated by the 2020 number of net meter customers and scaled by estimated growth from U.S. Energy Information

 Agency Form 861.
*** Reactive power compensation equipment such as shunt capacitors exist in the current system, but are not tabulated

  in this study. The scenarios in the study list the synchronous condensers and shunts added to the system, in addition to
  what is already present.
**** The Susitna-Watana hydro maximum power capability depends on the level of water in its reservoir.




                                                           9

                This report is available at no cost from the Alaska Center for Energy and Power (ACEP) at
                 the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF) at www.uaf.edu/acep/our-resources/index.php
Inspection of the charts in Figure 1.4 reveal the many ways in which the scenarios differ and how their differing
reliance on fuel, operations and maintenance, and capital inputs translate into changes in the cost of service.

These results are specific to the scenarios studied in this project, for the year 2050. These scenarios are illustra-
tive and do not attempt to identify the lowest cost scenario for 2050. Additionally, this study did not evaluate the
cost-effectiveness of near-term renewable additions. Instead it evaluated illustrative future high-decarbonization port-
folios. The cumulative cost of achieving high levels of renewable penetration is non-linear, due to increased trans-
mission and storage requirements. Additionally, from now until at least 2030, low-carbon projects will qualify for
investment tax credits of 40-50%4 of project capital costs. This creates an additional incentive to install renewable
energy projects early. The values estimated here for 2050 should not be used to quantify the cost effectiveness of
near-term wind and solar resource additions.

This study provides value through demonstrating the process of evaluating decarbonization scenarios, illustrating
the types of stability challenges and mitigations that can arise with the integration of inverter-based resources such
as wind, solar, and tidal energy, providing an example of how scenarios can be quantified in terms of cost of service,
and developing valuable information that can be used by Railbelt stakeholders in future studies of real implementa-
tions of new resources and technologies.




     4 All of Alaska qualifies as an energy community as defined by the US Department of Energy, which increases the investment tax credit from

30% to 40%. Projects that use domestically produced products qualify for an additional 10% for a total of 50%. The major wind manufacturers
are producing enough components in the US to qualify for domestic content. Major solar and battery manufacturers are also qualifying for
domestic content.


                                                                      10

                     This report is available at no cost from the Alaska Center for Energy and Power (ACEP) at
                      the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF) at www.uaf.edu/acep/our-resources/index.php
References
Bartlett, Drake and Parks, Keith. 2020 Study of the Levels of Flex Reserve and Regulating Reserve Necessary for
  Reliable System Operation while Accommodating the Uncertainty of Wind and Solar Generation at Varying Levels
  of Installed Wind and Solar Generation Capacity within the Public Service Company of Colorado Balancing Area
  Authority. en. Tech. rep. Public Service Company of Colorado, May 2022, p. 26. URL: https://www.xcelenergy.
  com/staticfiles/xe- responsive/Company/Rates%20&%20Regulations/Resource%20Plans/Clean%20Energy%
  20Plan/HE_114-KLS-3-Flex_Reserve_Study.pdf.
Denholm, Paul et al. “Summary of Market Opportunities for Electric Vehicles and Dispatchable Load in Electrolyz-
  ers”. In: (May 2015). DOI: 10.2172/1215243. URL: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1215243.
The Intertie Management Committees’ Railbelt Operating and Reliability Standards. Oct. 2017. URL: https://www.
  akenergyauthority.org/Portals/0/Programs/Railbelt%20Energy/Alaska%20Inertie/RailbeltOpratingRlbilityStndardsFinal2017.
  pdf?ver=2019-06-19-135947-740 (visited on 10/29/2023).




                                                           11

                This report is available at no cost from the Alaska Center for Energy and Power (ACEP) at
                 the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF) at www.uaf.edu/acep/our-resources/index.php
