  CONSORTIUM FOR ELECTRIC
        RELIABILITY
   TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS
          (CERTS)



      U.S. Department of Energy
Transmission Bottleneck Project Report



             March 19, 2003




                Prepared by
                 Jim Dyer
            Electric Power Group
                                                                       Page 2




        DOE TRANSMISSION BOTTLENECK PROJECT REPORT

                           TABLE OF CONTENTS

Executive Summary……………………………………………………………..5

Section 1: Introduction…………………………………………………….…...18

Section 2: Background and Definition…………………………………….…...19

Section 3: Study Methodology..……………………………………………..…21

Section 4: Results of CERTS’ Survey of Independent System Operators
           Ø CAISO……………………………………………..…………..21
           Ø ERCOT………………………………………………..……….29
           Ø MISO…………………………………………………………..36
           Ø NYISO…………………………………………………………45
           Ø ISO-NE…………………………………………………….…..56
           Ø PJM…………………………………………………………….64

Section 5: Summary of Bottleneck Information from Related Organizations
           Ø Federal Energy Regulatory Commission…………………..…..71
           Ø Western Governors’ Association……………………….……...76
           Ø North American Electric Reliability Council……………..…...84
           Ø Edison Electric Institute……………………………….…….…90

Section 6: Summary of Key Findings…………………………………….……93

Section 7: Bottlenecks Identified – Sorting and Prioritization………….….…..94
.
Section 8: References……………………………………………….………….98
                                                              Page 3


                  List of Acronyms
AC       alternating current
ATC      available transmission capacity
CAISO    California Independent System Operator
CSC      Commercially Significant Constraint
COI      California - Oregon Interconnection
DC       direct current
DSM      demand-side management
ECAR     East Central Area Reliability (Coordination Agreement)
EEI      Edison Electric Institute
EHV      extra high voltage
ERCOT    Electric Reliability Council of Texas
FERC     Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
HVDC     high voltage direct current
IPP      independent power producer
ISO      independent system operator
ISO-NE   Independent System Operator, New England
LE       London Economics
LMP      locational marginal pricing
LRP      load response program
MAIN     Mid-America Interconnected Network
MAPP     Mid-Continent Area Power Pool
MISO     Midwest Independent System Operator
MVAR     megavar
MW       megawatt
MWh      megawatt hour
NCPC     Net Commitment Period Compensation
NEMA     northeastern Massachusetts
NEPOOL   New England Power Pool
NERC     North American Electric Reliability Council
NOB      Nevada – Oregon Border
NOR      Norwalk/Stamford
NPCC     Northeast Power Coordinating Council
NY       New York
NYCA     New York Control Area
NYISO    New York Independent System Operator
PAC      Planning Advisory Committee
PJM      PJM Interconnection, LLC
PTO      Participating Transmission Owner
PSC      Public Service Commission
PSEG     Public Service Electric and Gas Company
PUCT     Public Utilities Commission of Texas
RAS      Reliability Assessment Subcommittee of NERC
RFP      request for proposals
RI       Rhode Island
                                                           Page 4


RNA    Restated NEPOOL Agreement
RTEP   Regional Transmission Expansion Plan
RTO    Regional Transmission Organization
SEMA   southeastern Massachusetts
SENY   southeast New York
SMD    Standard Market Design
SPP    Southwest Power Pool
SVC    static var compensator
SWCT   southwestern Connecticut
TAC    Technical Advisory Committee
TEAC   Transmission Expansion Advisory Committee
TFSS   Task Force on System Studies
TO     transmission owner
TLR    transmission loading relief
UPNY   upstate New York
TVA    Tennessee Valley Authority
VAR    Volt ampere reactive, a measure of reactive power
WECC   Western Electricity Coordinating Council
WGA    Western Governors’ Association
                          EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Introduction

The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) National Transmission Grid Study (DOE
2002) determined that congestion in the U.S. electricity transmission system places
daily constraints on electricity trade, increasing both electricity costs to consumers
and impacts reliable operations. In an effort to support DOE’s investigation of
transmission bottlenecks, the Consortium for Electric Reliability Technology
Solutions (CERTS) surveyed the current state of transmission congestion around the
nation.

This report describes the study findings, which are based on interviews and
discussions with the nation’s six established ISO/RTOs – the California ISO, the New
York ISO, the Midwest ISO, ISO New England, the Electric Reliability Council of
Texas, and the PJM Interconnection. In addition, this report summarizes information
on bottlenecks gathered from other sources, including the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission, the Western Governors’ Association, the North American Electric
Reliability Council, and the Edison Electric Institute.

To address the problems of transmission congestion, the Secretary of Energy
chartered an Electricity Advisory Board, which established the Transmission Grid
Solution Subcommittee. A report (Transmission Grid Solutions Report September
2002) prepared by this subcommittee highlights the importance of eliminating
transmission grid bottlenecks and calls for:

       Ø DOE to identify “National Interest Transmission Bottlenecks”
         that need to be relieved by construction of new facilities to
         upgrade or expand the transmission grid,

       Ø Congress to enact legislation that would provide FERC with
         “backstop” authority to approve applications to site “National
         Interest Transmission Facilities” to relieve DOE-identified
         bottlenecks, and

       Ø The formation of RTOs to facilitate grid expansion and to
         improve the operation of competitive wholesale electricity
         markets.

The Electricity Advisory Board’s Subcommittee report defines transmission
bottlenecks as follows: “Bottlenecks occur when the system is constrained such that it
cannot accommodate the flow of electricity and systematically inhibits transactions.
Thus, a bottleneck has economic and/or reliability impacts.” The report also reminds
us that solving one reliability limit will just cause the next most limiting element to
show up and therefore, we must look at these limits as “system” limits needing
“system” solutions.
                                                                                Page 6



Causes and Impacts of Bottlenecks

The Key Impacts of Bottlenecks are impairment of security, reduction of transmission
capability, foregone market transactions and reduced reliability. Bottlenecks may be
present under normal operating conditions or as a result of equipment failures and
system disturbance conditions.

   •   Physical Security of the Electricity System – Vulnerable infrastructure
       elements or critical facilities whose loss or impairment would substantially
       reduce the transmission of electricity into or out of key load or resource
       centers.

   •   Reliability – Criteria established by North American Electric Reliability
       Council (NERC), Regional Reliability Council, or local jurisdiction (state or
       ISO) limit transmission capability due to:

           -   Stability Limits – Anticipated power flows after a contingency in the
               list of specified contingencies would exceed stability limit, resulting in
               an unstable power system.

           -   Thermal Limits – Anticipated power flows after a contingency would
               exceed the thermal limit of a line or a component of the network (e.g.,
               a transformer).

           -   Voltage Collapse – Anticipated power flows after an event would
               create a reactive demand that would exceed the local reactive
               resources, resulting in rapid voltage decay.

           -   Loop Flow – Unscheduled power flows on lines or facilities that result
               in a violation of reliability criteria.

           -   Resource Deficiency – Installed capacity levels are inadequate to
               support the load demand.

   •   Market Economics – Bottlenecks prevent efficient/lower cost generating
       resources from serving the customers. Examples include:

           -   Implementations of transmission loading relief procedures (TLRs) in
               the Eastern Interconnections that result in reduction or termination of
               energy transactions.

           -   Inability of Southern California resources to compete for Northern
               California load (congestion on California Path 15 in a south-to-north
               direction)
                                                                              Page 7


ISOs Input Regarding Major Bottlenecks

The subsections below describe the results of interviews with the six existing ISOs
regarding the transmission bottlenecks on their respective systems.

California ISO (CAISO)




                         CAISO Transmission Bottlenecks

Based on system performance, simulation studies, and economic evaluations the
California ISO has proposed four projects to alleviate bottlenecks, two for reliability
and two for economic reasons.
       o Reliability Projects
           • Increase import capability into San Francisco Peninsula
           • Increase import capability into San Diego area
       o Market Economics Projects
           • Path 15: Midway-Los Banos
           • Path 26: Midway-Vincent

Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT)




                Commercially Significant Constraints in ERCOT
                                                                              Page 8


 South Texas to North Texas and South Texas to Houston – The following is a list of
 lines and stations that may need to be built to enhance the competitive market and
 capture the maximum benefits for the consumer. Currently, these projects are under
 review and will require a longer–term economic assessment:
       Ø Salem-Bryan/College Station-TNP 345-kV Line and New 345/138-kV
          Station
       Ø Clear Springs-Zorn-Harris Branch-Gabriel-Salado 345-kV Line
       Ø Cuero-Holman 345-kV Line and Establish Cuero 345-kV Switch Station
       Ø Coleto Creek-Cuero 345-kV Line
       Ø Whitney-Concorde 345-kV Line
       Ø Twin Oak-Lake Creek 345-kV Second Circuit

West Texas to North Texas Projects:
The first two lines are scheduled to be completed in 2003 and will eliminate a voltage
collapse problem in San Angelo and increase deliver of renewable energy out of West
Texas. The remaining three line projects are under review and awaiting additional
generation interconnections to be signed prior to increasing the export capability from
this zone:
        Ø Morgan Creek-Twin Buttes-Red Creek-Comanche Switch 345-kV Line
        Ø Graham-Jacksboro 345-kV Line
        Ø Twin Buttes-McCamey 345 kV line
        Ø Red Creek-Comanche Switch 345-kV Second Circuit
        Ø Comanche Switch-Killeen Switch 345-kV Line

Midwest Independent System Operator (MISO)
The MISO is still in the early stages of development and although the customers in
the Midwest are incurring congestion costs there is no mechanism in place to
capture or report these costs explicitly or publicly. MISO’s management and staff
realize that they are attempting to operate in a 21st-century competitive electric
market with 1950s technology (i.e., 230-kV and 345-kV transmission systems). As a
result, they have developed a vision of the future infrastructure, which overlays a
500-kV and 765-kV transmission grid over the existing 230-kV and 345-kV systems
so as to facilitate a competitive market while eliminating many of the existing
bottlenecks. See Table below for the number of miles of new transmission being
proposed under the vision plan. This is a long-term plan that is under study for its
potential economic and reliability benefits to the MISO region. The proposed 500 kV
and 765 kV overlay solves all or most of the existing congestion points, adds transfer
capability, links suppliers with markets and enhances reliability. The vision plan has
a cost estimate of $7 billion.
                            Voltage              Miles of New
                                                 Transmission
                            765 kV                   1360
                            500 kV                   3670
                            345 kV                   2670
                Source of Data - MISO
                 MISO’s Vision – EHV Transmission Expansion
                                                                          Page 9




            MISO’s Vision – Regional EHV Transmission Expansion


New York Independent System Operator – NYISO
Critical economic bottlenecks in the NYISO control area are a result of flows from
west to east and flows from upstate into the New York City and Long Island areas.
At this time, there are ongoing studies looking at options, discussions with
stakeholders, but there are no active projects to resolve or mitigate the existing
upstate bottlenecks. NY’s congestion costs should decline as more capacity is added
within the congested areas and merchant transmission facilities in the form of HVDC
ties are constructed between the NY control area and neighboring control areas.
                                                                        Page 10




 The Three Economically Significant Transmission Bottlenecks in NYISO Area

New England Independent System Operator (ISO-NE)
The key recommendations resulting from the ISO-NE’s Regional Transmission
Expansion Planning 2002 system assessments and transmission planning studies are
outlined below.
       Ø Southwestern Connecticut / Norwalk Improvements - Pursue distributed
         resource options in the near term while proceeding with short- and long-
         term transmission upgrades that will improve reliability and alleviate
         potential economic congestion costs in the Southwest Connecticut and
         Norwalk/Stamford sub-areas.
       Ø NW Vermont Load Pocket
         Although market responses to this newly understood problem have been
         insufficient to date, continue to evaluate proposed new generation,
         merchant and elective transmission projects, and distributed resources as
         potential alternatives solutions. Upon completion of all transmission
         planning studies, present all of the results to the ISO-NE Board of
         Directors for review.
       Ø Locked-in Generation/ Load Pocket
         Complete technical evaluations and formulate a long-term solution to the
         Southeastern Massachusetts/Rhode Island and Maine locked-in generation
         conditions as well as the NEMA/Boston load pocket.
                                                                                           Page 11


                                                                                      NB


                                                     HQ
                                                                                  BHE
        RTEP Geographic Scope

         Reliable and Economic Supply:
                                                                                 ME
              Deficient Load Pocket
              Marginal Load Pocket
                                                     VT               SME
              Adequate

              Locked In                                         NH
              Generation
                                                                          BOST
                                         NY                CMA/
                                                    WMA    NEMA

                                                                            SEMA
                                                           CT        RI

                                                    SWCT
                                              NOR



                                  The ISO-NE Area



PJM Interconnection (PJM)
                                                                                         Page 12




Congestion vs. Investment

Transmission congestion between 1998 and 1999 was up 40 percent and
between 1999 and 2000, it was up 140 percent. Moreover, transmission
investments have been declining for almost 25 years at an average rate of
$120 million per year. The investment in transmission during 1999 was less
than half of what it had been 20 years earlier.




              Figure – Transmission Congestion (NERC TLRs)




                       Figure – Transmission Investment1

1
 Eric Hirst and Brendan Kirby “Transmission Planning for a Restructured U.S. Electric Industry”,
prepared for Edison Electric Institute June 2001
                                                                           Page 13


Congestion a Moving Target

As indicated in the Figure on the next page, the locations of transmission congestion
can and will vary for different reasons, such as temperature differences between
regions, time of day and the season of the year. In the Figure it can be observed the
locations of congestion during the summer and winter of 2000 was different from the
locations during the same period in 2001. Example – Summer 2000, the upper
Midwest was cooler than normal. The South was hot and humid with higher natural
gas prices, low cost energy from the Midwest coal fired resources tried to flow south
to meet demands created congestion from north to south along ECAR and MAIN.
Summer 2001 saw a return to more normal temperatures and congestion flowed from
south to north and west to east directions, localizing the congestion along the
boundary between the MAPP and MAIN region as well as the eastern boundary of
ECAR with the SERC region.




Summary of Key Findings

The challenges and issues the ISO Planning staff face are very similar throughout the
nation. The following were the key findings that resulted from the site visits and
interviews with the ISOs management and staff:
                                                                        Page 14



Ø ISOs have the technical tools and ability to identify current and future
  transmission reliability criteria deficiencies and develop solutions to address
  bottlenecks through upgrades, new lines, and remedial actions schemes.
Ø ISO’s have the ability to identify the current economically significant
  bottlenecks; however, these tend to shift around based on market conditions.
Ø Transmission bottlenecks are more acute during extended peak demands, large
  resource outages, major construction projects, high fuel differential costs
  between regions and other market conditions.
Ø The ISO’s are challenged when asked to develop a business case justifying a
  market economics project and lack the necessary market models to adequately
  forecast and “prove” their need.
Ø Transforming the transmission network from the historical vertically
  integrated design to an open competitive network that facilitates large regional
  power transfers may have a significant price tag and there are no established
  processes for reviewing and getting approvals to build such facilities.
Ø ISO transmission expansion plans are shared with market participants for the
  purpose of attracting alternate solutions (i.e., generation, load response).
Ø Generation interconnection projects dominate the transmission planning
  process.
Ø The inter-ISO transmission projects under serious review or development are
  DC lines and they are being driven by merchant transmission interests:
           •   Cross Sound (NY-NE), Neptune (PJM-NY), Lake Erie Link (PJM-
               Canada) and Harbor Cable (PJM-NY)
Ø Regulatory approval process, especially for multi-state projects, is long and
  consequently may be very uncertain.
Ø Uncertainty about cost recovery and regulatory treatment provides a
  disincentive for Transmission Owners to do anything more than reliability
  projects.
Ø There is a disconnect between who pays for new transmission vs. who
  benefits – the customers of the local transmission owner could be straddled
  with the costs of fixing bottlenecks while those benefiting may be located
  several states away.
Ø A market design that does not include LMP creates disincentives in many
  cases – congestion costs added to uplift are spread over all users of
  transmission.
Ø The minimum interconnection standard for new generators does not ensure
  deliverability and as a result it creates stranded generation pockets, does not
  address regional adequacy issues and puts the planning process in a
  reactionary mode.
                                                                                           Page 15


   Ø Generation solutions have shorter lead times versus those for transmission
     projects and can provide a quicker fix to many bottlenecks, but recent
     generation project cancellations around the nation are creating challenges for
     the grid planners and eventually customers.
   Ø There is limited data available on planned new generation projects to support
     ISO long term planning studies.
   Ø Among the six ISOs there is not a common definition or method of
     monitoring and tracking congestion.

ISO Congestion Costs:

Total congestion costs experienced by the six ISOs for the four year period from
1999-2002 totaled approximately $4.8 billion. In this same time period the
congestion in the NYISO control area accounted for approximately $2.8 billion or
57% of the total congestion cost for the six ISOs.


                                             ISOs Yearly Congestion Costs


                               1400
                               1300
                               1200
                               1100




         Millions of Dollars
                               1000
                                900                                                 1999
                                800                                                 2000
                                700
                                600                                                 2001
                                500                                                 2002
                                400
                                300
                                200
                                100
                                  0
                                      PJM    CAISO   NYISO   MISO    ERCOT ISO-NE

                                            ISO Congestion Costs By Year


List of ISO Bottlenecks Sorted By Impacts:

Summary of bottlenecks by ISO are provided in the following figure. Historically,
ISOs have not addressed bottlenecks related to national security – focus has been on
reliability, customer impacts, TLRs, and market economics.
                                                                          Page 16




List of ISO Bottlenecks Sorted By Priority:
Based on the information received during the interview process, impacts the
bottlenecks have on reliability and markets and the cost data the priority for
addressing the ISOs bottlenecks are as indicated in the Table below:

     Priority    ISO                       Comment
        1       NYISO      Congestion costs over a three year period
                           are averaging in excess of $900 million
                           per year.
        2       ISO-NE     Load is at risk

        3       CAISO      California has two significant load
                           pockets that are forecasted to be in
                           violation or reliability criteria and a path
                           that has inhibited transactions between
                                                                         Page 17


                          the northern and southern portions of the
                          state.
       4        PJM       PJM’s congestion costs continue a four
                          year trend of almost doubling each year,
                          but the majority of 2002 increase is a
                          result of adding PJM West to its market.
       5       MISO       At this time, the true congestion costs are
                          unknown. The region will have difficulty
                          operating an efficient market with the
                          limited EVH infrastructure.
       6      ERCOT       ERCOT will need to expand its transfer
                          capability to accommodate new
                          generation and achieve market efficiency.


List of Transmission Project Costs:
The Table below indicates the costs associated with some of the proposed
transmission projects to relieve congestion:

     ISO                          Project                          Cost (Million)

    CAISO    Path 26                                                    $306
             Imports into San Diego                                     $252

   ERCOT     Two 345 kV lines from West Texas to North                  $140
             Texas

    MISO     Vision EHV Infrastructure                                  $7,000
             Gains Substation – add a second 345/138 kV                   $7
             transformer bank - needed to serve load growth in
             the area of Grand Rapids, Michigan

    NYISO    Marcy-New Scotland 345 kV circuit – line                    $75
             originally built for 765 kV could be converted
             from single to double circuit
             Rebuild two 115 kV lines out of Leeds to 345 kV            $225

   ISO-NE    Build a 345 kV loop around the Southwestern                $600
             Connecticut area (Phase 1 and 2)
             Reinforce Northwest Vermont load pocket                    $125

     PJM     Adding 500/230 kV transformers at Doubs                     $22
             Substation (Northwest of Washington, DC)
                                                                                Page 18



1. Introduction
   The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) National Transmission Grid Study (DOE
   2002) determined that congestion in the U.S. electricity transmission system
   places daily constraints on electricity trade, increasing both electricity costs to
   consumers and the risk of blackouts. In an effort to support DOE’s investigation
   of transmission bottlenecks that affect the national interest, the Consortium for
   Electric Reliability Technology Solutions (CERTS) surveyed the current state of
   transmission congestion around the nation. The goals of CERTS’ study were to:

       Ø Assess transmission operations and planning at the nation’s Independent
         System Operators/Regional Transmission Organizations (ISOs/RTOs)
       Ø Using available data, quantify the impacts of transmission congestion on
         operations and economics
       Ø Identify the impact(s) of the transmission bottlenecks and rank the regions
         in order of priority requiring action.

This report describes the study findings, which are based on interviews and
discussions with the nation’s six ISOs – the California ISO (CAISO), the New York
ISO (NYISO), the Midwest ISO (MISO), ISO New England (ISO-NE), the Electric
Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT), and the PJM Interconnection (PJM). In
addition, this report summarizes the information on bottlenecks gathered from other
sources including the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), the Western
Governors’ Association (WGA), the North American Electric Reliability Council
(NERC), and the Edison Electric Institute (EEI).

   Discussions with the ISOs focused on the following key issues:

           •   Definition(s) of transmission bottlenecks used by each ISO
           •   Impacts of transmission congestion on operations, types of problems
               caused by congestion (i.e., inability to import, export, use of higher
               priced resources, serve load), and timing of congestion (i.e., seasonal,
               annual peak, on peak, off peak)
           •   Historical pattern and trends of congestion costs
           •   Facility limitations or condition that is creating congestion (i.e. line(s),
               equipment, stability)
           •   Transmission modifications required to eliminate or mitigate
               congestion issues
           •   Transmission planning methods and processes, including coordination
               process with directly connected control areas and ISOs as well as
               regional planning activity

This report presents the findings of the CERTS study as follows:
Section 2 – background on and definition of transmission bottlenecks
Section 3 – summary of CERTS study methodology
Section 4 – results of CERTS’ survey of ISOs
                                                                              Page 19


Section 5 – summary of bottleneck information from ISOs and other related
           organizations
Section 6 – key findings
Section 7 – prioritizing transmission bottlenecks identified in this study based on the
           priority of required action
Section 8 – references

2. Background and Definition

   The National Transmission Grid Study, prepared by the U.S. Department of
   Energy (DOE) and presented to the President in May 2002, describes the
   formation of the U.S. electricity transmission system by vertically integrated
   utilities that historically produced and transmitted electricity to meet local
   demand. Interconnections between neighboring utilities were constructed to
   increase system reliability and share the economics of excess or low cost
   generation. The transmission system is an extensive, interconnected network of
   high-voltage power lines specifically designed to transport electricity from remote
   generators to meet the demand of the utilities customers. The introduction of
   competition in wholesale electricity markets during the past decade has called
   upon the transmission system to accommodate flows of electricity for which it
   was not designed. The result has been congestion in the system. According to a
   recent DOE independent assessment of the transmission system, it was found that
   interregional transmission congestion costs consumers hundreds of millions of
   dollars annually, even though wholesale electricity markets have lowered
   consumers’ electricity bills by nearly $13 billion a year.

   To address the problems of transmission congestion, the Secretary of Energy
   chartered an Electricity Advisory Board, which in turn, established the
   Transmission Grid Solution Subcommittee. A report (Transmission Grid
   Solutions Report September 2002) prepared by this Subcommittee highlights the
   importance of eliminating transmission grid bottlenecks and calls for:

       Ø DOE to identify “National Interest Transmission Bottlenecks”
         that need to be relieved by construction of new facilities to
         upgrade or expand the transmission grid,
       Ø Congress to enact legislation that would provide FERC with
         “backstop” authority to approve applications to site “National
         Interest Transmission Facilities” to relieve DOE-identified
         bottlenecks, and
       Ø The formation of RTOs to facilitate grid expansion and to
         improve the operation of competitive wholesale electricity
         markets.

   The Electricity Advisory Board’s report defines transmission bottlenecks as
   follows: “Bottlenecks occur when the system is constrained such that it cannot
                                                                             Page 20


accommodate the flow of electricity and systematically inhibits transactions.
Thus, a bottleneck has economic and/or reliability impacts.”

The September 2002 report also notes that all transmission systems have an upper
limit – a “reliability limit” – on their ability to transfer electricity and that
bottlenecks and the methods to alleviate their impacts cannot always be
straightforwardly specified:

           A bottleneck is not always the inability to transfer electricity
           from point A to point B due to a single transmission circuit, but
           can be due to the inability to transfer electricity over a group of
           lines (sometimes called an interface or flowgate) or a system
           voltage or system stability limit that occurs at a given level of
           electricity transfer. Therefore, relieving a ‘bottleneck’ may
           involve more than just replacing or upgrading one facility. In
           some cases, it may not even involve a transmission line at all,
           but rather the addition of voltage support equipment (capacitors
           or static var compensators), local generation or stability
           enhancing devices, such as power system stabilizers on
           generating units. Even after an identified reliability limit is
           relieved, another facility or group of facilities will show up as
           the next higher reliability limit. As such, the reliability limits to
           the transfer of electricity should be thought of as ‘system’
           reliability limits that require a ‘system’ solution, not just the
           upgrade or replacement of one facility.

The Key Impacts of Bottlenecks:
Bottlenecks may be present under normal operating conditions, a result of
equipment failures or system disturbance and/or peak system demands.

   •   Physical Security of the Electricity System – Vulnerable infrastructure
       elements or critical facilities whose loss or impairment would substantially
       reduce the transmission of electricity into or out of key load or resource
       centers.

   •   Reliability – Criteria established by North American Electric Reliability
       Council (NERC), Regional Reliability Council, or local jurisdiction (state
       or ISO) limit transmission capability due to:

       -   Stability Limits – Anticipated power flows after a contingency in the
           list of specified contingencies would exceed stability limit, resulting in
           an unstable power system.

       -   Thermal Limits – Anticipated power flows after a contingency would
           exceed the thermal limit of a line or a component of the network (e.g.,
           a transformer).
                                                                            Page 21



           -   Voltage Collapse – Anticipated power flows after an event would
               create a reactive demand that would exceed the local reactive
               resources, resulting in rapid voltage decay.

           -   Loop Flow – Unscheduled power flows on lines or facilities that result
               in a violation of reliability criteria.

           -   Resource Deficiency – Installed capacity levels are inadequate to
               support the load demand.

   •   Market Economics – Bottlenecks prevent efficient/lower cost generating
       resources from serving the customers. Examples include:

           -   Implementations of transmission loading relief procedures (TLRs) in
               the Eastern Interconnections that result in reduction or termination of
               energy transactions.

           -   Inability of Southern California resources to compete for Northern
               California load (congestion on California Path 15 in a south-to-north
               direction)

3. Study Methodology
    The study described in this report comprises of three key activities:

       •   Review of publicly available documents from:
              - ISOs
              - FERC
              - Western Governors’ Association (WGA)
              - North American Electric Reliability Council (NERC)
              - Edison Electric Institute (EEI)
              - DOE

       •   Interviews with planning and operations personnel from the six ISOs (on-
           site interviews were conducted for all ISOs except PJM, whose
           representatives were interviewed on a conference call)

       •   An assessment to quantify the impact of congestion on operations and
           economics and a ranking of the identified transmission bottlenecks


4. Independent System Operators Survey Results

The subsections below describe the results of interviews with the six ISOs surveyed
for this study. Each subsection begins with a summary of key findings, followed by
                                                                            Page 22


the detailed information gathered from documents provided by each ISO and the
extensive interviews with ISO personnel.

4.1 California Independent System Operator (CAISO)

Summary of Key Findings

CAISO’s criteria for selecting transmission expansion/enhancement projects are
based on system reliability (e.g., the specification of a double contingency that
includes the simultaneous loss of a critical transmission line and a significant
resource) and economics (cost to eliminate congestion is less than or equal to
forecasted congestion cost). Transmission bottleneck projects totaling $720 million
have been proposed, with two projects based on market economics (Path 15, Midway-
Los Banos and Path 26, Midway-Vincent) and two based on reliability (increasing
import capability to San Francisco and San Diego areas). Projects based on
economics are facing an increasingly uncertain future because of regulatory
uncertainty and construction cost recovery issues. For generation interconnection, the
CAISO complies with FERC’s policy of only requiring the minimum reliability
standard, which may result in pockets of stranded generation. CAISO currently uses
zonal pricing but will shift to locational marginal pricing (LMP) in 2005.

Information provided by CAISO
CAISO control area includes much of the state of California. The other control areas
in California are made up of the public power systems of Los Angeles and
Sacramento and the Imperial Irrigation District. The CAISO provided the following
information regarding transmission bottlenecks and transmission planning from its
web site (www.caiso.com) and interviews with some of the CAISO staff.

CAISO Grid Coordinated Planning Process
[Figure 1] is a block diagram of the CAISO’s process that is used to plan future
changes and additions to the grid. The URL location on the CAISO’s web site for
transmission planning information is www1.caiso.com/thegrid/planning/. The
following is an excerpt from the web site.

             The CAISO Grid Coordinated Planning Process is flexible;
             projects can be generated from a variety of sources including
             transmission owners, CAISO, or any entity that participates in
             the energy marketplace by buying, selling, transmitting, or
             distributing energy or ancillary services into, out of, or through
             the CAISO-controlled grid. The participation of all of these
             interests in the planning process is expected to facilitate the
             development of projects that will result in a grid that best meets
             the needs of all its users and maximizes benefits to the state of
             California.
                                                                           Page 23


            The projects that will be developed through this process will fill
            a number of needs including:
                 Ø Interconnecting generation or load
                 Ø Protecting or enhancing system reliability?
                 Ø Improving system efficiency
                 Ø Enhancing operating flexibility
                 Ø Reducing or eliminating congestion
                 Ø Minimizing the need for must-run contracts

Annual Transmission Plans – “The overall CAISO planning process relies heavily on
the Participating Transmission Owners (PTOs) that filed annual transmission plans
primarily for the portions of the grid that they own. These annual plans are
coordinated with neighboring systems and describe the proposed facility additions
over a minimum five-year planning horizon.” It is not unusual for the CAISO to
expand the planning horizon to ensure long lead time projects are accounted for and
there is effective coordination between mid-term and long-term planning.




          Figure 1 - Flow Diagram of CAISO’s Coordinated Planning
   Plans identify system concerns and evaluate the technical merits of various
   potential transmission, generation, and operating solutions. In conducting their
   analyses, the PTOs will address the needs identified by the various market
                                                                        Page 24


participants. The CAISO is involved in the annual PTO planning process [see
Figure 2] and the study cases and simulations developed for these annual plans
will be available to CAISO and other market participants so that integrated review
and independent studies can be accommodated.




Figure 2 - Flow Diagram of PTO’s Coordinated System Assessment Process

Projects flow through the Western Electricity Coordinating Council (WECC)
Transmission Planning Process. Once CAISO projects are identified, they will go
through the WECC for coordination and integration. To the maximum extent
possible, the CAISO planning process utilizes the WECC to streamline
transmission planning and avoid redundancy. An additional advantage of utilizing
WECC is that all transmission owners in California follow these processes
whether or not they are CAISO PTOs.

CAISO Review Process – All CAISO Grid projects will also undergo a CAISO
review process, focused on ensuring that projects connected to the grid will meet
the CAISO grid planning criteria. Assessment of many projects according to the
                                                                         Page 25


grid planning criteria will have already been undertaken as part of the WECC
process. In addition, concurrently with WECC’s transmission planning process,
CAISO will conduct an operational review to ensure that each project meets
CAISO’s needs for operational flexibility and the requirements for proper
integration with the CAISO grid. Many projects will also need to be evaluated
from an economic perspective to determine whether project costs make economic
sense and should be incorporated into the access fee or split among directly
identifiable beneficiaries.

Generation interconnection – Generating resources are built to a minimum
interconnection reliability standard, which does not assure deliverability. The
developer has the option to pay for upgrades that will ensure deliverability. If the
developer elects not to incur the added cost to ensure that their dispatch is
physically feasible the CAISO will evaluate future congestion impacts. If the
evaluation indicates the potential for significant congestion, the CAISO will
develop an expansion project and all associated project costs will be allocated
appropriately, based on assignable benefits.

Construction – At the end of the planning and review process the CAISO will
track construction to ensure project is completed and in service when needed.

Congestion Costs
Figures 3 below shows the CAISO’s average monthly congestion costs for the
years 1998-2002 and Figure 4 shows the CAISO’s total annual congestion costs
for the same years. The year 2000 was probably the most significant year in the
California dysfunctional market, which explains some of the high congestion
costs for that year.




        Figure 3 –Average Monthly Congestion Costs - 1998-2002
                                                                            Page 26




             Figure 4 – Total Annual Congestion Costs – 1998-2002


Interview team observations based on on-site interviews with CAISO staff:

   Ø CAISO will be implementing LMP in 2005 or sooner.

   Ø Based on system performance, simulation studies, and economic evaluations
     CAISO has proposed four projects to alleviate bottlenecks, two of the projects
     are justified for reliability reasons and two are justified for economic reasons.
     Figure 5 shows CAISO bottlenecks.
     o Reliability Projects
         • Increase import capability into San Francisco Peninsula
         • Increase import capability into San Diego area
     o Market Economics Projects
         • Path 15: Midway-Los Banos
         • Path 26: Midway-Vincent

   Ø The criterion used to determine need for the four projects:
     o Planning criterion for reliability projects – The area being evaluated
        should be able to withstand the simultaneous loss of a critical transmission
        line or facility with the loss of a significant resource contingency. In the
        case of the San Francisco Peninsula, based on historical performance, the
        criterion is the loss of two major resources.
     o Economic criterion for market economics projects – The cost to eliminate
        congestion is less than or equal to the expected congestion cost.

   Ø The cost of the above two reliability justified and two economically justified
     transmission projects is approximately $720 million.
                                                                         Page 27


   o Path 15 upgrade: A new Los Banos – Gates 500-kV line and Gates –
     Midway 230-kV line, plus two 225-MVAR capacitor banks. Cost - $306
     million. The CAISO using reasonable assumptions calculated that, in a
     drought year, the project savings are $205 million dollars or two thirds of
     the project cost and, in a normal year, the savings are $104 million.

       As described above, in concluding that the Path 15 Upgrade would pay for
       itself within one drought year and three average years, the CAISO
       assumed that generation would develop uniformly throughout the state.
       The CAISO did not suggest that more generation is more likely to develop
       in the South than in the North, but noted that if this happened, the savings
       from the project would be even more significant (ranging from $69
       million per year to $1,304 million per year depending on the reasonable
       assumptions that are made). Of course, if more generation develops in
       Northern California than Southern California the savings would range
       from $12 million per year to $137 million per year. The CAISO is
       awaiting approval on this project from the CPUC.

   o Path 26 upgrade – Installation of a generating tripping scheme. Cost - $2
     million. Path 26 is south of and in series with Path 15. If Path 15 is
     upgraded, congestion problems will move to Path 26; the current cost to
     resolve congestion on Path 26 is low. The percent of time congestion was
     present and documented for 2000 and 2001 was 1% and 4% respectively.
     The project is currently going through the CPUC review and approval
     process.

   o San Diego Area – A new 500-kV line between Valley and Rainbow,
     installation of 500/230kV transformer, with flow control capability, 230-
     kV line work and additional voltage support. Cost - $252 million. In the
     first quarter of 2003, the CPUC reviewed the project and it was not
     approved. The CAISO will appeal the Commission’s decision.

   o San Francisco Peninsula - Convert the existing 60-kV line between
     Jefferson and Martin to 230 kV. Cost - $150 million. The project is
     currently going through the CPUC review and approval process.

Ø Projects that are based on economics face an uncertain future for several
  reasons. First, there is a need for appropriate market modeling tools to
  support the decision-making process associated with forecasting need in an
  open competitive market. Second, the review and approval process is not
  clear, especially for multi-jurisdictional projects. Third, there is uncertainty
  associated about who pays for construction of new lines and facilities and how
  cost recovery will be possible.
                                                                        Page 28




               Figure 5 - CAISO Transmission Bottlenecks

Ø Value of Transmission Projects – In early 2001, CAISO staff began
  developing a methodology to assess the economic value of proposed
  transmission projects. CAISO deemed this effort necessary because there is no
  commonly accepted methodology in California or elsewhere in the nation for
  evaluating the economic value of transmission facilities and because CAISO
  is increasingly faced with the need to make determinations on proposed
  transmission facilities that are justified based on economics rather than
  reliability. The CAISO, with input from industry stakeholders, worked on
  developing this methodology with a common object to reduce, to the extent
  possible, the possibility of inconsistent assessments and results at the various
  stages of project approval. CAISO issued a request for proposal (RFP) for a
  consultant to develop the methodology in consultation with CAISO and a
  steering committee; the US office (Boston) of the United Kingdom consulting
  firm London Economics (LE) was selected.

   The LE methodology provides a comprehensive, highly sophisticated
   approach to evaluating the economic benefit of transmission projects.
   However, CAISO believes that modifications and enhancements to the LE
   methodology are necessary before it can be used. The CAISO Department of
   Market Analysis and Grid Planning are working with LE to make the
   necessary modifications. The objective is to develop a revised methodology
   that “reasonably” captures the economic benefits of transmission upgrades,
   considering:
           Ø new generation entry
                                                                             Page 29


              Ø market power
              Ø a wide spectrum of system conditions

      A revised LE methodology paper should be available by first quarter 2003.
      See CAISO’s website for more information (search: “London Economics”).

   Ø The CAISO has approved more than $1.0 billion in transmission expansion
     and replacement since it began operations in March 1998.


4.2 Electric Reliability Council of Texas – (ERCOT)

   Summary of Key Findings
   ERCOT has reassigned congestion costs so that they are no longer uplift costs but
   are instead assigned to the entities deemed responsible for the congestion. This
   reassignment has significantly reduced congestion costs in the ERCOT system,
   from $180 million for eight months of 2001 to $41 million in 2002. In 2002, the
   ERCOT area was divided into four congestion zones: West, North, South and
   Houston. Each zone has generating resources in excess of the peak demand.
   Since February of 2002, there is little difference between the monthly average
   marginal energy clearing prices between zones. ERCOT is the only ISO that
   requires all consumers to pay for transmission integration costs associated with
   new generation facilities. In ERCOT, over 95% of energy requirements are
   managed through bilateral schedules and 80 % of ancillary services are self
   arranged. Three major new transmission projects are called for in ERCOT’s
   current plan, one for reliability reasons, based on planning criteria violations, and
   two for economic reasons. ERCOT is in the process of developing the necessary
   justification to support the two economics-based projects.

   Information Provided by ERCOT
   ERCOT provided the following information regarding transmission bottlenecks
   and transmission planning from their web site (www.ercot.com) and interviews
   with some members of the ERCOT staff.

   The ERCOT ISO supervises and exercises comprehensive authority over the
   overall planning of bulk transmission projects that affect the transfer capability of
   the ERCOT transmission grid. ERCOT’s Transmission Planning information can
   be accessed on their web site at the following URL:
   www.ercot.com/Participants/SystemPlanning.htm

   Determining the Need for Transmission Additions to Address Constraints
   ERCOT uses the following criteria in determining when constraints need to be
   addressed by transmission facility additions:
      Ø Studies show that a contingency on the transmission system will result in
          one or more of the four conditions listed below under the forecasted
          generation additions:
                                                                          Page 30


     1. Flow on a circuit is at or above the thermal limit for the post-
         contingency loading
     2. Voltage at a bus is at or below the minimum post-contingency limit
     3. A portion of the transmission system reaches a state of voltage
         instability that may lead to voltage collapse
     4. A portion of the transmission system would not be dynamically stable
         if a particular disturbance were to occur
   Ø Significant excess generation is constrained inside an area where
     forecasted load fails to materialize as is anticipated or where the load
     growth cannot be met by sufficiently competitive new generation as a
     result of the inability to site new generation in that area
   Ø Additions may be indicated when the studies show an inadequate amount
     of transmission capacity in a load area.

Considering New Transmission Proposals Submitted by Interested Parties
ERCOT’s “Procedure for ISO Evaluation.” requires them to consider all new
transmission proposals submitted by interested parties that comply with the
protocol. The ISO will support those proposals that meet ERCOT’s planning
criteria and, in accordance with the above procedures for assessing need, best
meet the system’s future requirements.

Processing of Requests for New Generation Interconnection
ERCOT receives and processes new generation interconnection requests as per its
“Generation Interconnection Request Procedures.” As a part of that request
procedure, ERCOT performs a steady-state security study to determine how
feasible a site is for interconnection and at what level the generator can expect to
run with other generation in operation in the area before significant transmission
additions are required. In addition, a very rough estimate is made of the
transmission system additions or upgrades needed to integrate the new generation.
If the generating entity decides to go forward at the proposed site, the ISO will
then initiate a full interconnection study. Once an interconnection agreement is
signed, the local transmission owner commences the construction of all required
high voltage transmission facilities. The generation owner is responsible for low
voltage interconnection requirements associated with plant auxiliary power
requirements.

Recommendation of Needed Transmission Facility Additions
ERCOT transmission planning process considers both reliability and market
facilitation in its planning activities and utilizes the results of the constraint
studies, the proposed projects submitted by transmission owners and other
interested parties, and generation interconnection security studies to perform
ongoing transmission planning. The objective of the planning process is to
determine transmission facility additions or modifications needed to:
    • Maintain reliability sufficient to meet ERCOT and NERC transmission
         planning and operating criteria
                                                                          Page 31


   •   Integrate new generating facilities that, in the opinion of the ISO, are
       reasonably sited.
   •   Adequately serve areas with increasing load
   •   Provide adequate competitive generation to meet the load demand of each
       ERCOT zone
   •   Support renewable energy projects

Conducting Open Review and Comment on Proposed Facility Additions
ERCOT posts all recommended transmission projects, including support
information for them, on its website and notifies the Texas Public Utilities
Commission (PUCT) staff, ERCOT Technical Advisory Committee (TAC), TAC
Subcommittees, and ERCOT distribution list of the posting. In addition, ERCOT
schedules open meetings for all interested parties to discuss projects prior to their
final consideration.

Submitting Final Recommended Transmission Projects to the ERCOT Board and
Notifying PUCT
Following the open meetings and after all concerns and issues are adequately
addressed, ERCOT will determine the final recommended transmission projects to
be submitted to the ERCOT Board for review and approval. This is normally an
annual process, but may occur more frequently if system conditions so require.
ERCOT formally informs PUCT of all recommended transmission projects and
the designated providers for those projects.




        Figure 6 - Transfer Capability between the ERCOT Zones

Transfer Capability between Zones
Figure 6, identifies the current transfer capability between the four ERCOT zones.
Although a total of 4,590 MW of transfer capability exist between the zones it is
not significant relative to the regions peak demand (57,606 MW) and installed
                                                                             Page 32


   generating capacity (74,247 MW). Figure 7, indicates that in 2002 each zone had
   generation resources in excess of its peak demand.




                  Figure 7 - Zone Demand at 2002 Peak vs. Gen

   Congestion
   ERCOT separates transmission congestion into local and commercially significant
   congestion. A Commercially Significant Constraint (CSC) is a constraint that
   results in the maximum flow of power between zones, while still operating within
   grid reliability limits, but limiting the free flow of energy within the ERCOT
   market to a commercially significant degree.




    Figure 8 - Comparison of CSC Congestion Cost (Uplift vs. Direct Assign)

Effective February, 15, 2002, ERCOT started a new congestion cost allocation
method, which resulted in reassigning congestion cost from an uplift to all loads to a
direct allocation to those entities that are responsible for it. ERCOT manages
congestion in real-time and determines ‘shift factors’ for zone to zone transactions in
                                                                                 Page 33


order to calculate the contribution to congestion for each such transaction.
Congestion costs are directly assigned to those entities with actual injections and
sinks (not schedules) that have an impact (direct or indirect, such as loop flow) on a
constrained path. This enhancement has resulted in a significant reduction in the
overall cost of congestion across CSCs. Figure 8 compares the CSC congestion cost
incurred for the period July 31, 2002 (start of single control area operations) through
February 14, 2002 and a much reduced amount of congestion incurred for the period
since February 15 through December 22, 2002. Figure 9 shows the accumulated CSC
congestion costs for 2002.




                                                                     Source of Data -
                                                                     ERCOT




            Figure 9 - 2002 Estimated Cumulative CSC Congestion Costs

   Figure 10 indicates that after redirecting congestion costs there have been
   reasonably constant prices across the four zones. This is due to the fact each zone
   has more installed generating capacity then its peak demand, the zones have a
   diversified resource mix and reasonably similar fuel cost.
                                                                         Page 34




   Figure 10 - 2002 Zonal Average Marginal Clearing Price for Energy

Observations by the interview team from on-site interviews with ERCOT staff
   Ø Acquiring transmission rights-of-way for new transmission lines can
      impact project timing. Transmission Owners (TOs) who retain rights-of-
      way in their rate base beyond a reasonable period of time may be subject
      to cost recovery limitations by the PUCT. As a result TOs may wait until
      there is a high level of certainty in a project before acquiring the necessary
      rights-of-way. Uncertainty and risk management can delay projects and
      become a cost driver.

   Ø An extended period of limited transmission capital expenditures, new
     generation siting in Texas and recent plant retirements have ERCOT
     playing catch up. A reason for the limited capital expenditures in the past
     may have been that under the vertically integrated utility structure the
     utility had the ability to make trade offs between transmission capital
     expenditures and a pass through fuel costs associated with redispatch

   Ø The current regulatory process to review and approve lines that are needed
     to facilitate the market is not completely clear.

   Ø In the fall of 2002, ERCOT was informed that 7,000 MW of existing
     generation will be retired. This will not present an immediate resource
     adequacy issue, but it presents challenges for the transmission planners
     that will need to perform multiple assessments and mitigation plans, which
     include the need for Reliability Must Run contracts for a short duration.

   Ø In ERCOT, all consumers pay for transmission integration costs associated
     with new generation facilities. ERCOT is the only ISO/RTO that has such
     a policy.
                                                                          Page 35



   Ø In the ERCOT market, 95% of the energy is procured through bi-lateral
     agreements and 80% of the ancillary service requirements are met through
     self-arranged transactions.

   Ø As a result of the current level of congestion being low, ERCOT’s primary
     focus is to resolve immediate problems that affect local area reliability and
     to acquire the necessary simulation and market models to evaluate future
     grid expansion needs.

Transmission Bottlenecks
In 2002, the ERCOT area was divided into four congestion zones: West, North,
South and Houston. The limiting CSCs were: West to North, North to West,
South to Huston and the worst being between South to North. There are three (3)
major project associated with three of the four congestion zones. As shown in
Figure 11. One of the projects is required to meet their reliability criteria within
the zone West to North. The other two projects are for economics and the ability
to move energy between South and North and South and Huston. ERCOT is in
the process of developing project justification that supports the two economic
projects.




        Figure 11 – Commercially Significant Constraints in ERCOT

South Texas to North Texas and South Texas to Houston – The following is a list
of lines and stations that may need to be built to enhance the competitive market
                                                                             Page 36


   and capture the maximum benefits for the consumer. Currently, these projects are
   under review and will require a longer–term economic assessment:
      Ø Salem-Bryan/College Station-TNP 345-kV Line and New 345/138-kV
          Station
      Ø Clear Springs-Zorn-Harris Branch-Gabriel-Salado 345-kV Line
      Ø Cuero-Holman 345-kV Line and Establish Cuero 345-kV Switch Station
      Ø Coleto Creek-Cuero 345-kV Line
      Ø Whitney-Concorde 345-kV Line
      Ø Twin Oak-Lake Creek 345-kV Second Circuit

   West Texas to North Texas Projects:
         Note - The first two lines are scheduled to be completed in 2003 and will
         eliminate a potential voltage collapse problem in San Angelo and increase
         delivery of renewable energy out of West Texas. Project cost: $140
         Million for 205 miles of 345-kV line. The remaining three line projects are
         under review and awaiting additional generation interconnections to be
         signed prior to increasing the export capability from this zone:
     Ø Morgan Creek-Twin Buttes-Red Creek-Comanche Switch 345-kV Line
     Ø Graham-Jacksboro 345-kV Line
     Ø Twin Buttes-McCamey 345 kV line
     Ø Red Creek-Comanche Switch 345-kV Second Circuit
     Ø Comanche Switch-Killeen Switch 345-kV Line


4.3 Midwest Independent System Operator (MISO)

   Summary of Key Findings

   MISO has the most requests for TLRs reported by NERC but reports congestion
   costs of only $3 million per year. The MISO is in the early stages of operation
   and although the customers in the Midwest are incurring congestion costs there is
   no mechanism in place to capture or report these costs explicitly or publicly.
   Currently, the local utilities are still managing congestion in the traditional
   method of re-dispatching their available resources and recovering resulting fuel
   differential costs through rates. The MISO has plans to implement LMP in 2003,
   which will provide visibility for some or most of the costs associated with
   congestion plus provide the right signal for transmission investment.

   MISO anticipates being able to meet projected load growth reliably through 2007.
   Due to reported high utilization of existing facilities a portion of the MISO region
   has been denying ATC requests for new uses since 1999. MISO envisions
   developing a new infrastructure that will overlay the existing system of 230- and
   345-kV lines with a combination of 500-kV and 765-kV lines (estimated cost: $7
   billion) and that will address many existing bottlenecks. MISO requires only the
   minimum reliability interconnection standard for new generation, which could
   result in pockets of stranded generation.
                                                                      Page 37



Information provided by MISO
MISO provided the following information regarding transmission bottlenecks and
transmission planning from their web site (www.midwestiso.org) and through
interviews with some of the MISO staff.

The following MISO Transmission Planning information can be found at the
following URL – www.midwestiso.org/plan_inter/index.shtml

The MISO Planning Structure
The MISO Planning Advisory Committee (PAC), as shown in Figure 12, consists
of representatives from eight stakeholder groups with a structure similar to the
Advisory Committee. The PAC advises the MISO Planning Staff on policy and
adds a diverse input to the Planning process.




               Figure 12 - MISO Planning Advisory Structure

The MISO Planning Support Group (See Figure 13) provides technical support
for all planning functions. It is made up of:
         – Transmission Owners
         – Generators
         – Regulators
         – Other Stakeholders
                                                                       Page 38




                 Figure 13 - MISO Planning Support Group

Expansion Planning Group Objectives
   Ø Focus is the development of the coordinated MISO Expansion Plan
   Ø Responsible for ensuring that necessary work (data gathering, analyses,
      assessments, locally coordinated planning) is accomplished at the lower
      levels
   Ø Bringing results of this coordinated work to the Expansion Planning
      Group as input to the MISO Plan
   Ø Recommend requirements for coordination of plans – establishing sub-
      regional groups as needed

Transmission Owner Agreement
   Ø The agreement sets up a collaborative process to produce the most
      efficient and cost effective plan while giving consideration to the inputs
      from all the stakeholders
   Ø Develop MISO Expansion Plan by Integrating:
          – Plans from IPP Facilities Studies
          – Plans from TOs
          – Plans from studies requested by Planning Advisory Committee, or
              Regulators
          – Plans generated by MISO staff to meet reliability or improve
              efficiency of system
   Ø Consideration is give to a
          – Wide variety of contingency conditions
          – Alternative projects
          – Expected use patterns

The MISO will use the GE MAPS software package to identify economic
indicators of values of relieving key constraints
    Ø Value of relieving specific constraints
                                                                         Page 39


   Ø Value of a Long-Term Vision Plan
   Ø Value of specific more near-term transmission solutions (Stakeholders
     provide input to desired transmission solutions to evaluate)

MISO Transmission Expansion Plan (MTEP)
The MISO is currently drafting its first Transmission Expansion Plan that will be
referred to as MTEP 03, in reference to the year of issue, and will be submitted to
the Board in May of this year. The plan will document bulk electric system
projects to be developed through the year 2007 that MISO believes are necessary
to maintain the reliability of the region.

Projects to be contained in the report will be designated as Planned projects or
Proposed projects. Planned projects will be those for which a system condition
has been found to violate applicable planning standards, and the Planned project
has been determined to be the recommended project from among alternatives.
Proposed projects are those for which a system condition has been found to
violate applicable planning standards, and the proposed project is the best-known
alternative at this time. The draft report estimates the direct cost of the Planned
and Proposed facilities is $1.8 billion for the six-year period 2002-2007. Of these
recommended projects, $1,054 million are considered Planned, and $707 million
are considered Proposed and will continue to be reviewed.

Currently, there is approximately 147,000 miles of transmission lines throughout
the MISO area. The total miles of new construction and upgrades under the draft
MTEP 03 would add approximately 3,400 miles of transmission by 2007. This
includes lines that went in service in 2002, as well as lines Planned or Proposed
through 2007. See Figures 14 and 15




  Figure 14 - Cumulative Line Additions/Enhancements by Voltage Class \
                                 Miles
                                                                         Page 40




 Figure 15 - Cumulative Line Additions/Enhancements by Planning Status
                                (Miles)

Observations by the interview team as a result of on-site interviews with MISO
staff
    Ø MISO is still in the early stages of operation and, at this time, the only ISO
      market in operations is that which is required to meet the regions requests
      for transmission service.
    Ø The MISO region has the most requests for TLR (see Figures16, 17 and
      18) reported at NERC but reports congestion costs of only $3 million/per
      year. The transmission line that has the most TLRs is a 69-kV line that
      loops around the northeast section of Lake Michigan. There are identified
      solutions to reduce the number of future TLRs called on these facilities.
      Eight solutions, as shown in Table 1, have been identified for the top
      nineteen constraints on the TLR list. Some of the other flowgates will
      need to be evaluated further in light of potential new generation additions
      in the immediate areas.
                                                      Page 41




Table 1 – MISO Solutions for Some of the Top Constraints
                                                 Page 42




          Figure 16 - MISO Flowgates




Figure 17 - MISO TLRs by Month (2001 and 2002)
                                                                      Page 43




Figure 18 - MISO Flowgate TLR Hours by Time of Day Relative Eastern
                          Interconnection

 Ø Although the customers in the Midwest are incurring congestion costs
   there is no mechanism in place to capture or report these costs explicitly or
   publicly. Currently, the local utilities are still managing congestion in the
   traditional method of re-dispatching their available resources and
   recovering fuel differential costs through rates.
 Ø The MISO has plans to implement LMP in 2003, which will provide
   visibility for some or most of the costs associated with congestion plus
   provide the right signal for transmission investment.
 Ø MISO is forecasting, based on its current transmission infrastructure and
   IPPs that have signed interconnection agreements, that it will be able to
   meet anticipated load growth reliably through 2007.
 Ø Generation interconnection – MISO, like the other FERC jurisdictional
   ISOs, only requires a generator to build to the minimum interconnection
   reliability standard, which could lead to pockets of stranded generation.
 Ø ISO management and staff realize that they are attempting to operate in a
   21st-century competitive electric market with 1950s technology (i.e. 230-
   kV and 345-kV transmission systems).
 Ø The Northwest portion (MAPP) of MISO region has been fully utilizing
   the existing transmission capability and has been denying ATC requests
   for new uses since 1999 and somewhat reflects the of ATC utilization
   elsewhere in MISO.
                                                                     Page 44


Ø The region has high potential for development of large wind farms.
Ø MISO vision infrastructure – to overlay the existing 230-kV and 345-kV
  systems with a combination 500-kV and 765-kV transmission grid that
  facilitates a competitive market while mitigating the impacts on many of
  the existing bottlenecks (see Figure19). The vision plan has a cost
  estimate of $7 billion and is a very preliminary long-term planning
  concept that is under study for its potential economic and reliability
  benefits to the MISO region. See Table 2 below for the number of miles
  of new transmission being proposed under the vision plan.

                           Voltage             Miles of New
                                               Transmission
                           765 kV                  1360
                           500 kV                  3670
                           345 kV                  2670
                Source of Data - MISO
          Table 2 - Miles of Proposed EHV in MISO’s Vision Plan

   The features of the envisioned overlay as stated by Dale Osborn, MISO, in
   his “Power the Plaines” presentation on Sept. 9, 2002, are as follows:
       • It would relieve the present constraints in the Mid-Continent Area
          Power Pool (MAPP) and on the MAPP- Mid-America
          Interconnected Network (MAIN) boundaries by adding
          transmission capacity spanning the constraints
       • It would collect generation along the Manitoba-to-Omaha line and
          deliver it to the south and east.
       • It would relieve the Cooper South Flowgate (southeastern
          Nebraska) by creating a counterflow on the Illinois-to-Wisconsin
          border that pushes south through MAIN and the East Central Area
          Reliability (ECAR) Coordination Agreement region into
          Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) and Arkansas then north
          through Oklahoma and Kansas to Cooper South. This is an
          example of loop flow control through regional system design.
       • A southern Indiana-TVA tie would further enhance the
          counterflow.
       • Loops would have their own backup for contingencies and thus
          reduce the impacts of outages on the underlying system.
       • 1,000 MW of hydro power could be delivered on the Manitoba
          line.
       • The loop to Manitoba could be used to receive wind energy and
          send it back, firmed up by hydro power, at a time when the energy
          could be best used by the loads.
       • Reliability would be increased as the loops represent transmission
          capacity with an availability of 99%.
       • North to south power and energy exchanges are being evaluated as
          a possible source of revenue to justify the overlay. The price in the
                                                                            Page 45


                  north is lower due to a prevalence of low cost coal in the region.
                  The south is dominated by gas-fired generation. Information
                  concerning the power transfer performance and the economics of
                  the overlay and its parts will be contained in the MISO
                  Transmission Expansion Plan 03.
              •   The 500 kV overlay spans the constraints in the present
                  transmission system and adds transfer capability to the
                  transmission system.




         Figure 19 - MISO’s Vision – Regional EHV Transmission Expansion


4.4 New York Independent System Operator – NYISO

   Summary of Key Findings
   Since January 2000, NYISO has experienced transmission congestion costs of
   approximately $2.75 billion. Critical bottlenecks that are associated with
   approximately two-thirds of the congestion costs are the upstate Central East and
   Leeds interfaces. Two merchant direct current (DC) lines, the Neptune and
   Harbor Cable projects, are being developed. Transmission expansion is generally
   undertaken based on reliability justification; expansion of transmission facilities
   based on economic justification is almost non-existent. New requests for
   generator interconnections are responding to LMP signals, with 89% of proposed
   generation on the “correct” side relieving congestion.
                                                                           Page 46



Information Provided by NYISO
NYISO provided the following information regarding transmission bottlenecks
and transmission planning from their web site (www. nyiso.com) and through
interviews with some of the NYISO staff.

NYISO Transmission Expansion and Interconnection Process (see Planning web
site http://www.nyiso.com/services/planning.html)
NYISO’s Transmission Expansion process includes all reinforcements of the
transmission system, such as added facilities, modifications, or upgrades of
existing lines equipment and facilities. Normally, the transmission expansions are
planned for the purpose of increasing the power-transfer capability of the
transmission system and/or to maintain adequate reliability of the interconnected
electricity systems. Figure 19 provides an overview of the NYISO Transmission
Expansion process.




             Figure 20 - NYISO Transmission Expansion Process

           The Transmission Expansion process begins with transmission
           planning studies. Figure 20 shows that the process beginning
           with a customer request for a System Impact Study. A System
           Impact Study focuses on specific transmission reinforcement
           options to achieve specific objectives, so, prior to this study, it
           may be desirable to first conduct a Reinforcement Options
                                                            Page 47


Study to develop a list of conceptual or "illustrative"
transmission reinforcement possibilities to meet more general
objectives. Figure 21 provides an overview of the process for a
Reinforcement Options Study and how it ties in with the
Transmission Expansion process.

The NYISO Staff conducts the Reinforcement Options Study
and develops a limited number of illustrative transmission
reinforcement options, including associated cost estimates, to
increase the transfer capability or transfer limits of the
transmission interfaces identified by the Public Service
Commission (PSC) as having significant congestion. The
reinforcement options developed by the staff must be reviewed
and approved by the NYISO Operating Committee. NYISO
provides the reinforcement options results to the PSC and
makes the results available to all customers and potential
customers so that they can evaluate the economic costs and
benefits of new facilities.




   Figure 21 - NYISO Reinforcement Study Process

Northeast Power Coordinating Council (NPCC) Area
Transmission Reviews
                                                                            Page 48


              NPCC has established a Reliability Assessment Program to
              bring together work done by the council, its member systems,
              and areas relevant to the assessment of bulk power system
              reliability. As part of the Reliability Assessment Program, the
              Task Force on System Studies (TFSS) periodically reviews the
              reliability of the planned bulk power transmission system of
              each area of NPCC and the transmission interconnections to
              other areas. To assist the TFSS in carrying out this charge, each
              NPCC area annually assesses the reliability of the planned bulk
              power transmission system within its area and the transmission
              interconnections to other areas (an Area Transmission Review)
              in accordance with these guidelines. A report of this
              assessment is sent to the TFSS for review. Each area is also
              responsible for providing an annual report to the Compliance
              Monitoring and Assessment Subcommittee about its Area
              Transmission Review in accordance with the NPCC Reliability
              Compliance and Enforcement Program.

NYISO’s Report on Development of Competitive Electricity Markets
In February 2001, the PSC, concerned about the lack of transmission system
expansion requested that NYISO evaluate transmission reinforcement options that
would increase transfer capability between the NY and neighboring control areas. In
response to this request, the NYISO developed a study process that not only looks at
the options requested by the PSC but also conducts the evaluation from the
perspective of the entire Northeast. The objectives of this study are:
       Ø To establish the context of the NY transmission grid within the Northeast
           power markets
       Ø To develop a relative measure of the efficiency of the transmission grid in
           terms of congestion costs
       Ø To evaluate, per the PSC request, illustrative transmission system
           enhancements that can improve the efficiency of the transmission grid –
           i.e., reduce congestion costs
       Ø To assess, where appropriate, the relative benefits of the enhancements
       Ø To identify the barriers to transmission expansion

The following are excerpts of the NYISO’s report to the PSC (The TX-Factor in the
Development of Competitive Electricity Markets, Version 2, 11/26/2002)

              The Northeast Region of NERC represents approximately
              155,000 MW of peak demand and operates four competitive
              markets, with some what limited transfer capability between
              the markets [see Figure22]. The nominal transfer capability
              between the Northeast control areas is only on the order of 4-
              5% of the total peak load of the region.
                                                                   Page 49




     Figure 22 - Transfer Capability in the Northeast Region of NERC

 [Figure23] shows the load and pricing zones within the NYISO control
 area.




                 Figure 23 - NYISO Load and Price Zones

Based on the price of energy:
   Ø Zones A-E have are referred to as a the super zone “West NY”, since all
       they zones have relatively similar energy prices
                                                                             Page 50


       Ø The balance of the zones can be defined as East NY, where energy prices
         are not homogeneous within the eastern zones. The zones in East NY are:
             o Zones F – I are defined as the Hudson Valley,
             o Zone J (New York City) and
             o Zone K (Long Island)
       Ø The yellow line in Figure 23 shows the boundary between West NY and
         East NY, including the boundary between PJM and the East zones, which
         defines the Total East transmission interface.
       Ø The upper half of the Total East interface is defined as the Central East
         interface.
       Ø The lower half including the dotted part of the yellow line is known as the
         interface between Upstate NY and Southeast NY or the UPNY – SENY
         interface. The dotted part of the line effectively divides the Hudson Valley
         into a lower and upper part electrically. Below the UPNY–SENY
         interface, the cable interface includes the red dotted line on the
         transmission map and also the lower end of the total east interface. This
         interface contains all the major underground and/or submarine cables
         supplying New York City and Long Island.

   Table 3 presents the approximate peak load and generating capacity in the super
   zones defined above. Table 4 represents the nominal transfer capability at the
   transmission interfaces.




                     Table 3 - Peak Load and Capacity by Zones




                        Table 4 - Nominal Transfer Capability

Congestion:
The New York market began operations on November 1, 1999. Since operations
began, the differences in the zonal prices (i.e., congestion costs) have been dramatic.
During its first three calendar years of operations, 2000, 2001 and 2002, the NYISO
incurred congestion cost of approximately 1.24 billion, 568.4 million and 944.4
million dollars respectively, see Table 5. These costs were calculated or developed
from day-ahead market prices and metered zonal loads. Although there were other
                                                                            Page 51


factors related to inefficiencies in the initial period of the NYISO market that have
been greatly addressed, much of the difference in congestion costs between 2000 and
2001 are attributed to the outage of a large nuclear plant, in Southeast NY. In year
2002, again the congestion almost reached one billion dollars. The majority of the
differences from 2001 were a result of line outages that impacted the cable interfaces
and NYISO started tracking congestion associated with the 138 kV in-city load pockets




     Table 5 - Estimated NY Congestion Cost: Total NY and for the Major
                 Constraints for the Years 2000, 2001 and 2002




  Figure 24 - The Three Economically Significant Transmission Bottlenecks in
                               NYISO Area
                                                                          Page 52



Further, the analysis shows that about two-thirds of the congestion costs for the NY
system can be assigned to upstate Central East and Leeds interfaces see Figure24.
As result of planned and unplanned transmission line outages, congestion costs
incurred in year 2002 have been approximately $1 billion. This puts congestion
costs in year 2002 exceeding year 2001 costs by almost $400 million dollars and
approximately $300 million below year 2000 cost.

             A base case was developed as the reference case for the system
             with the expected generation expansion between now and 2010
             plus the addition of the [high-voltage direct-current] HVDC
             merchant transmission facility between Long Island and
             Connecticut. [Table 6] presents base-case results.




                     Table 6 - Congestion Base-Case Forecast

             A merchant transmission scenario was also evaluated - In
             addition to the HVDC tie included in the base case, the NYISO
             interconnection queue contains several merchant transmission
             proposals. Two proposals are included in the scenario. The two
             proposals are the HVDC tie lines between NY and PJM
             resulting in a total increase in tie capability between the two
             control areas of 1260 MW. This represents an increase of
             almost 50% in the transfer capability between NY and PJM or
             an almost 20% increase in the total east interface. The two
             merchant transmission projects are the Neptune and Harbor
             Cable projects [These projects are described in more detail in
             Section 5]. These facilities were added to the base case and
             modeled to be in service by 2003. The objective of modeling
             the facilities in service by 2003 is to demonstrate the benefits
             of transmission expansion before significant generation
             additions are in place in the congested zones. [Table 7]
             presents the results for this scenario. The cost for the two
             projects is estimated to be in the area of $450 to 500 million.




               Table 7 - NY Congestion and Energy Costs – Merchant
                                                              Page 53


                    Transmission Scenario

The third set of scenarios evaluated includes upgrades to the
existing [alternating current] AC transmission network. The
focus of these scenarios is the transmission corridor between
Marcy, NY and Pleasant Valley, NY. The facilities in this
corridor are elements that interconnect interfaces between the
Central East and UPNY-SENY interfaces. The Central East
interface is currently one of the major bottlenecks in the
Northeast and will be replaced by the Leeds – Pleasant Valley
circuit, a major circuit in the UPNY–SENY interface, by 2006.
The first system upgrade facility to be evaluated is the
reconductoring of the Leeds – Pleasant Valley circuit.
Reconductoring increases thermal capability and hence the
transfer capability across a corridor. The estimated cost of this
particular upgrade is 40 million dollars and increases the
thermal capability by 25%. As in the “merchant transmission”
scenario, this upgrade was added to the base case and was
modeled as if it were in service as early as 2003. [Table 8]
presents the impact on NY congestion costs for this scenario.




Table 8 - NY Congestion and Energy Costs – Leeds – PV
           Reconductoring Scenario Year

The second upgrade to be evaluated in this corridor converts
the 345 kV circuit from Marcy to New Scotland from single to
double circuit operation. This line, originally built for 765 kV
operations, has four bundled conductors per phase. It has been
determined that the four bundled conductors per phase could be
split into two bundled conductors per phase thus creating
another circuit. This involves the construction of a new
substation at New Scotland, including the addition of a 900
MVAR static var compensator (SVC) for voltage support. This
would raise the Central East transfer capability by 600 MW
and cost approximately 75 million dollars. This upgrade was
added to the base case and, as in the Leeds – PV
reconductoring upgrade, modeled as in service in 2003. [Table
9] presents the impact on NY congestion costs for this
scenario.
                                                            Page 54




Table 9 - NY Congestion and Energy Costs – Central
               East Scenario Year

The fourth scenario evaluated is the rebuilding of one of the
115 kV circuits between New Scotland and Leeds to 345 kV as
well as rebuilding one of the 115 kV circuits between Leeds
and Pleasant Valley to 345 kV operations. This work in
conjunction with Marcy to New Scotland conversion to double
circuit creates another 345 kV circuit between Marcy and
Pleasant Valley. It is estimated that the cost to create this
additional 345 kV circuit between Marcy and Pleasant Valley
would cost approximately 225 million dollars and increase
transfer capability across the Total East Interface by 1100 MW.
This scenario is added to the base case and is modeled in
service by 2003. Although it is recognized that it is not
technically feasible to have such an upgrade in service by
2003, it provides another example that clearly contrast the
economics in terms of congestion costs savings of transmission
expansion vs. generation expansion. [Table 10 presents the
congestion cost benefits]




   Table 10 - NY Congestion and Energy Costs –
        Additional 345 kV Circuit Scenario

Report Conclusions:
The analysis presented demonstrates that NY congestion costs
should decline as more capacity is added within the congested
areas and merchant transmission facilities in the form of
HVDC ties are constructed between the NY control area and
neighboring control areas. The report also shows that there are
benefits to expanding the AC transmission network to enhance
the efficiency of the market. Congestion that results from
transmission constraints shrinks the scope of markets, dampens
competition and increases the need for market mitigation
processes. This is especially true in zones with load pockets.
However, there are formidable barriers to achieving that end
                                                                             Page 55


               and there are currently no coherent and organized efforts or
               processes in place to systematically and effectively address
               these barriers.

The NYISO suggested six recommendations to address the issues identified in its
report; the primary recommendation is that the appropriate process or processes be
organized in New York State to address barriers to the development of new
transmission to relieve congestion, in particular, economic barriers. For instance, the
establishment of a task force to address this issue within the current NYISO
governance process, including the appropriate state and local agencies, such as the
NY PSC and New York City municipal government.

Observations by the interview team as a result of on-site interviews with NYISO staff
      Ø Independent transmission developers of merchant projects in the region
          prefer the use of DC transmission lines because only the energy that is
          scheduled to flow will actually flow on these lines. As a result, a
          developer can easily collect the congestion rent or a usage fee from the
          entities scheduling energy between points.

       Ø Generators are only required to build to a minimum interconnection
         reliability standard

       Ø Generators (89%) are requesting to be connected on the correct side
         relieving congestion and it is believed there are two reasons contributing
         to that fact, first – they are responding to LMP price signals and second -
         the fact the Load Serving Entities have specific locational capacity
         requirement (see Figures 25 and 26).




  Figure 25 – New York Control Area Proposed Generation (December 1999)
                                                                          Page 56




      Figure 26 – New York Control Area Proposed Generation (April 2002)

      Ø Critical economic bottlenecks in the control area are a result of flows from
        west to east and flows from upstate into the New York City and Long
        Island areas

      Ø At this time, there are no projects going forward to eliminate or mitigate
        any of the major upstate transmission bottlenecks. The issues being who
        pays vs. who benefits, financing and cost recovery. The NYISO is
        continuing to work with the PSC on resolution of the issues.

      Ø The NYISO is reviewing a low cost ($1 million) remedial action scheme
        (generator tripping) that could provide a $63 million reduction in
        congestion charges in the Leeds-Pleasant Valley area.


4.5 New England Independent System Operator (ISO-NE)

   Summary of Key Findings
   ISO-NE has a detailed process for identifying transmission constraints by sub-
   area and uses both reliability and economic criteria for evaluating transmission
   expansion/enhancement projects. The ISO has identified both critical reliability
   bottlenecks and economic bottlenecks; most have been in existence for 10 to 20
   years. A merchant DC line between Long Island and Connecticut to mostly
   address the congestion into Long Island is expected to be ready for commercial
   operation in summer 2003. Total congestion costs for ISO-NE were $165 million
   in 2000-2001 and $102 million in 2001-2002, with the decrease largely
                                                                           Page 57


   attributable to the institution of Net Commitment Period Compensation (NCPC)
   and Three-Part Bidding (as described below). Congestion costs are currently an
   uplift charge, but the ISO is shifting to LMP in 2003. The region also has pockets
   of stranded generation in northwest Vermont, Maine and southeastern
   Massachusetts-Rhode Island.

   Information Provided by ISO-NE
   ISO-NE provided the following information regarding transmission bottlenecks
   and transmission planning from their web site (www.iso-ne.com) and through
   interviews with some of the ISO-NE staff.

   Regional Transmission Expansion Plan (RTEP) Process
   The ISO-NE’s RETP02 Report, approved by the Board on November 7, 2002,
   describes the RTEP process. The report can be found at the following URL:
   www.iso-ne.com/transmission/Regional_Transmission_Expansion_Plan/

Here are some excerpts:
              ISO-NE began the RTEP process with the approval of the 66th
              Agreement amending the Restated NEPOOL Agreement
              (RNA) in September 2000. The RTEP process is intended be a
              “request for solutions” that provides market signals appropriate
              for generation planning, merchant transmission facilities,
              elective upgrades, demand-side management (DSM), and load
              response programs (LRPs). If the market signals provided by
              the RTEP process fail to result in adequate solutions for system
              problems or needs, a coordinated transmission plan specified in
              the RTEP identifies appropriate projects to ensure a reliable
              electricity system and reduce congestion in an economic
              manner. The RTEP process thus ensures consistency with
              planning criteria by integrating market responses with needed
              reliability and economic upgrades. The RTEP goal is a reliable
              transmission system that facilitates the development of a robust
              market with due consideration to environmental issues. The
              fundamental elements of the planning process are summarized
              below.

              The studies that make up the RTEP reports are conducted with
              the input and advice of the Transmission Expansion Advisory
              Committee (TEAC). TEAC provides important stakeholder
              input for both the assessment of the power system that provides
              market signals and the performance of numerous Transmission
              Planning Studies. The presentations made at TEAC meetings
              by ISO-NE are available for review at the ISO-NE website –
               (www.iso-
              ne.com/transmission/Regional_Transmission_Expansion
              _Plan/Transmission _Expansion_Advisory_Committee/).
                                                            Page 58



The existing RTEP process is shown in [Figure 27].




         Figure 27 - ISO-NE RTEP Process

Using appropriate transportation models for system reliability
and economic congestion, RTEP assesses the NEPOOL
transmission system. These analyses are based on the division
of the control area into RTEP sub-areas. These sub-areas do
not necessarily coincide with any political or service area
boundaries but instead reflect the existing electrical
characteristics of the bulk transmission system.
[Figure 28] shows the sub-areas of the New England region
that RTEP models. The results of the transportation analyses of
these sub-areas do not capture system constraints within these
sub-areas but instead reflect transfer capabilities among
sub-areas. Therefore, transportation modeling results based on
the sub-areas should be viewed as providing optimistic
outcomes for system performance.
                                                                                Page 59


                                                                              NB


                                             HQ
                                                                          BHE
RTEP Geographic Scope

 Reliable and Economic Supply:
                                                                         ME
      Deficient Load Pocket
      Marginal Load Pocket
                                             VT               SME
      Adequate

      Locked In                                         NH
      Generation
                                                                  BOST
                                 NY                CMA/
                                            WMA    NEMA

                                                                    SEMA
                                                   CT        RI

                                            SWCT
                                      NOR



                 Figure 28 – ISO-NE Sub-Areas

  Sub-area designations:
  BHE          -      Bangor Hydro Electric
  ME           -      Maine
  S-ME         -      Southern Maine
  NH           -      New Hampshire
  VT           -      Vermont/Southwest New Hampshire
  BOSTON       -      Boston Import
  CMA-NEMA -          Central Massachusetts / Northeastern Mass.
  W-MA         -      Western Massachusetts
  SEMA         -      Southeastern Massachusetts
  RI           -      Rhode Island
  CT           -      Connecticut
  SWCT         -      Southwestern Connecticut
  NOR          -      Norwalk / Stamford
  Note - NB, HQ and NY represent the New Brunswick, Hydro Quebec,
  and New York external control areas respectively.
  Modeling of the New England region and its sub-areas depends
  on a number of assumptions regarding new unit in-service
  dates, generation availability, fuel costs, timing of transmission
  upgrades, load forecasts, and transactions with neighboring
  control areas. A major part of the RTEP process is an updating
  of modeling assumptions to reflect changed circumstances. As
  a result, ISO-NE’s forecast for sub-areas may need to be
                                                                          Page 60


              modified over time to remain current with conditions impacting
              the bulk power grid.

              System problems are also identified through transmission
              planning studies that analyze the system in detail and capture
              system performance within the sub-areas. These studies
              provide additional market signals and form an essential basis
              for the study of system improvements.
              The RTEP02 Report summarizes these studies - (www.iso-
              ne.com/transmission/Regional_Transmission_Expansion_
              Plan/).

Major RTEP02 Findings and Recommendations
The major findings of the system assessments and transmission planning studies
conducted are outlined below.
       Ø Southwestern Connecticut (SWCT) and the Norwalk / Stamford
         (NOR) Areas
         The most urgent system reliability need is in the SWCT and NOR
         sub-areas. These combined areas lack the required transmission
         infrastructure to provide adequate reliability to electricity
         customers. Studies demonstrate that, without transmission
         infrastructure upgrades, there will be widespread violations of
         transmission planning criteria. As a result, it is doubtful that,
         without these upgrades, the existing system could reliably support
         projected loads in the long term. In the short term, it is doubtful
         that, without significantly increased implementation of DSM and
         LRP, the existing system can reliably support projected loads.
         ISO-NE has determined that the existing transmission system
         configuration cannot provide for significant generation expansion
         or even the simultaneous operation of existing generation at full
         load.

       Ø Resource Adequacy/System Reliability
         Accounting for the impact of the recently announced retirements of
         New Boston Unit 1 and Devon Units 7, 8, & 10 (Devon units = a
         total of 231 MW, located in SWCT), barring any unanticipated
         future generator retirements in New England and assuming
         recommended transmission upgrades are made in SWCT,
         NEPOOL will meet its generation resource adequacy requirements
         of interrupting firm load no more than once in 10 years for the
         period 2002 through 2011.

       Ø Forecasted Range of Congestion Costs
         Taking into account transmission improvements that went into
         service during summer 2002, projected congestion costs under a
                                                                          Page 61


          Standard Market Design (SMD) environment in New England will
          be mostly due to constraints in the SWCT and NOR sub-areas.
          Forecasted congestion costs in the SWCT and NOR sub-areas
          could dramatically increase if any of the major generating units or
          transmission facilities are out of service during peak load periods
          and during any periods of extremely hot weather. Conversely,
          significant peak load reductions would reduce congestion costs.
          Congestion costs could range from a low of $50million to a high of
          $300 million for 2003.

      Ø Northwest Vermont
        The Northwest Vermont area faces severe reliability problems
        because of weak interconnections with the bulk transmission
        system and a lack of generating resources including distributed
        resources in the region. The condition is expected to worsen with
        continued load growth.

      Ø Northeastern Massachusetts (NEMA)/Boston
        The NEMA/Boston upgrades completed and planned for the future
        coupled with new generating units scheduled in the Boston area
        have largely addressed both reliability and economic congestion
        concerns for the next five years. The report also expresses the
        need to address longer term issues for the NEMA-Boston area.

      Ø LRP/DSM Potential
        LRP and/or DSM programs in constrained sub-areas could
        significantly reduce forecasted congestion and improve reliability.

      Ø Locked-in Generation
        Proposed short-term solutions to locked-in generation problems in
        Maine and Southeastern Massachusetts /Rhode Island (SEMA/RI)
        will help mitigate projected system-wide congestion costs.
        However, long-term improvements in the export capabilities of the
        Maine and SEMA-RI sub-areas will be required to further mitigate
        the locked-in generation problems in those sub-areas. These
        improvements would increase overall system reliability and market
        efficiency.

RTEP02 Recommendations
The recommendations resulting from the RTEP02 system assessments and
transmission planning studies are outlined below.
                                                                        Page 62


   Ø SWCT/ NOR Improvements (cost: more than $600 million)
     Pursue distributed resource options in the near term while
     proceeding with short- and long-term transmission upgrades that
     will improve reliability and alleviate potential economic
     congestion costs in the SWCT and NOR sub-areas.
            § Long Mountain Breakers and Capacitors at the Rocky
                River and Stony Hill substations (work completed)
            § Upgrade of overstressed circuit breakers in the
                Norwalk-Stamford area
            § Glenbrook Statcom ($6 million)
            § SWCT 345-kV Phases I & II ($600 million)

   Ø NW Vermont Load Pocket (cost: $125 million)
     Although market responses to this newly understood problem have
     been insufficient to date, continue to evaluate proposed new
     generation, merchant and elective transmission projects, and
     distributed resources as potential alternatives solutions. Upon
     completion of all transmission planning studies, present all of the
     results to the ISO-NE Board of Directors for review. Proceed with
     other projects required to ensure reliability of supply to Vermont
     subsequently approved by ISO-NE BOD.

   Ø Locked-in Generation/ Load Pocket
     Complete technical evaluations and formulate a long-term solution
     to the SEMA/RI and Maine locked-in generation conditions as
     well as the NEMA/Boston load pocket.

   Ø LRP
     Continue to implement and improve the current ISO-NE LRP.
     Develop, as needed, specific load response incentives, particularly
     in SWCT and NOR sub-areas.

Historical Congestion
In the ISO-NE market energy uplift and uplift attributable to congestion decreased
substantially from FY 2000 to FY 2001. This decrease is attributable to the
following several factors:
    Ø The introduction of Net Commitment Period Compensation (NCPC).
    Ø Three-Part Bidding.
    Ø Lower fuel prices.
    Ø Reserve sharing
        Note - Three-Part Bidding and NCPC are components of SMD, which are
        similar to mechanisms currently used in New York and PJM.
                                                                          Page 63


NCPC - ISO-NE implemented NCPC on July 1, 2001, which changed uplift
from an hourly calculation to a daily calculation to be more consistent with
the method of making unit commitment decisions. NCPC encourages
generators to submit more flexible unit characteristics in their daily bids and
results in minimizing uplift costs. The three-Part Bidding allows discrete
bids for start-up costs, no-load costs, and incremental energy costs. Figure
29 compares the levels of uplift prior to the introduction of NCPC (July
2000 through April 2001) and after introduction of NCPC (July 2001
through April 2002). The total uplift declined by approximately 38 percent
as a result of implementing NCPC and Three-Part Bidding. Figure 30
shows congestion by area.




              Figure 29 - Congestion and Energy Uplift Costs




            Figure 30 - Transmission Congestion MWh by Area
                                                                             Page 64



Observations by the interview team as a result of on-site interviews with ISO-NE staff

       Ø ISO-NE will be implementing LMP in 2003.
       Ø Critical reliability bottleneck areas are imports into Boston, Southwest
         Connecticut, and NW Vermont; economic bottlenecks are exports from
         New Brunswick to Maine, from Maine to New Hampshire, and from New
         England to New York.
       Ø Many of the region’s bottlenecks have existed for one to two decades.
       Ø The merchant DC line between Long Island and Connecticut is expected
         to start testing in the spring and be ready for commercial operation in
         summer of 2003.
       Ø The region has pockets of stranded generation in the following areas:
             o Bangor
             o Southern Maine
             o Southeastern Massachusetts
             o Rhode Island


4.6 PJM Interconnection (PJM)

   Summary of Key Findings
   Yearly congestion costs have been increasing in PJM from $53 million in 1999 to
   $132 million in 2000 to $271 million in 2001 and to approximately $430 million
   in year 2002. A significant amount of the cost increase for year 2002 is attributed
   to including PJM West facilities to the market. Five economic bottleneck areas
   have been identified, but at this time, PJM’s Tariff/Operating Agreement
   precludes “ordering” economic upgrades in the RTEP. In March of 2003 they
   will file proposed changes to their Tariff/Operating Agreement to correct this
   issue. PJM has the minimum interconnection reliability standard requirement for
   new generation, but IPPs typically request and pay for transmission upgrades to
   ensure that their energy can be delivered; IPPs are willing to pay for these costs in
   PJM because the load density within the region many of the transmission
   upgrades are low cost.

   Information Provided by PJM
   PJM provided the following information regarding transmission bottlenecks and
   transmission planning from their web site (www.pjm.com) and through
   discussions with some of the PJM staff.

   PJM RTEP Process
   The PJM Board of Managers approved the third RETPlan in October of 2002.
   The report can be accessed from the PJM web site home page by selecting
   “Regional Transmission Expansion Planning”.
                                                                        Page 65


The PJM RTEP Process [see Figure 31] governs the means by which PJM
coordinates the preparation of a plan for the enhancement and expansion of the
regional transmission system on a reliable, economic, and environmentally
acceptable basis - in order to meet the demands for firm transmission service in
the PJM Control Area. All expansion plans developed by PJM conform to the
reliability standards and criteria specified by the North American Electric
Reliability Council (NERC), the Mid-Atlantic Area Council (MAAC) for PJM
East, and the East Central Area Reliability (ECAR) Council for PJM West.
 The RTEP process provides a mechanism by which input from all
 interested parties is considered. The process includes broad stakeholder
 input through the activities of the Transmission Expansion Advisory
 Committee (TEAC). And, further, by virtue of its regional scope, the
 RTEP Process assures coordination of expansion plans across multiple
 transmission owners’ systems, permitting the identification of the most
 effective and efficient expansion plan for the region. The RTEPlan which
 evolves is reviewed by PJM’s independent Board of Managers who has
 the final authority for RTEPlan approval and implementation.
 The PJM RTEP Process:
       •   The process develops a coordinated expansion plan as a result
           of the need for additional transfer capability associated with
           criteria violations identified through reliability council (MAAC
           & ECAR) assessments, load forecasts and generation additions
           or transmission or distribution system upgrades by
           transmission owners themselves.
       •   PJM notifies the Transmission Expansion Advisory Committee
           (TEAC) regarding initiation of the study process. The TEAC
           notifies PJM of any additional transmission considerations to
           be included.
       •   PJM consults with the TEAC to prepare a Scope and
           Procedure. The Scope includes identification of system
           limitations; proposes mitigating actions/system expansion
           alternatives; evaluates proposed enhancements; estimates
           associated expansion costs and proposed cost allocation; and
           assesses compliance with established reliability criteria.
       •   Transmission Owners supply PJM with the necessary load
           forecast data and transmission system modeling data.
       •   Upon completion of its studies and analyses, PJM prepares a
           recommended enhancement and expansion plan for review by
           the TEAC. The plan also includes recommendations for
           assignment of cost responsibility.
                                                                    Page 66




                    Figure 31 - PJM RTEP Process
      •   Any transmission owner may offer an alternative plan that PJM
          will evaluate. If PJM does not accept such alternative, the
          Transmission Owner may submit it for alternative dispute
          resolution.
      •   The PJM Board of Managers has the authority for approval of
          the final RTEP, including any alternatives also included.
      •   Transmission Owners shall construct and own or finance the
          transmission facility enhancements or expansions specified in
          the RTEP (subject to requirements of applicable law,
          regulation actions, siting requirements, financing, cost
          recovery, etc.).
These business rules define the general steps under which an RTEPlan is
developed. Each RTEPlan, though, while following the same general business
                                                                         Page 67


rules is subject to drivers which influence the results and recommendations which
the Board ultimately reviews.

The PJM Board approves the final RTEP, including any alternatives. The current
and approved RTEP is published on the PJM internet site and is submitted to the
applicable reliability council for verification that all enhancements or expansions
conform to reliability principles and standards.

Congestion
The information for this section was taken from PJM’s “State of the Market
Report 2002, Section 1.

           Table 11 shows the total congestion in PJM by year from
           1999 through 2002. Congestion charges in 2002 were 58%
           higher then 2001 which totaled $271,400,000 and 2001 was
           approximately twice the congestion charges in 2000, which
           totaled $132,000,000. The year 2002 increase in measured
           congestion was, for the most part, a result of adding PJM-
           West facilities to the market. The addition of PJM-West
           Region transmission facilities to the market resulted in the
           redispatch of those PJM units required to relieve congestion
           on specific transmission constraints rather than the simple
           restriction of all power transfers that had been the pre-market
           method of controlling congestion for transfers of power from
           west to east across the Allegheny Power System (APS) and
           across PJM. The result of this market-based redispatch was
           the explicit pricing of congestion via LMP.

                           Year           $ in Millions
                           1999                $53
                           2000               $132
                           2001               $271
                           2002               $430
                  Table 11 - Total PJM Congestion by Year

           [Table12] lists the constraints that ranked in the top 10 for
           hours of occurrence for 2000 or 2001 and ranked by positive or
           negative change between the years, sorted by percent of PJM
           load impacted. Constraints 1 through 4 in make up the set of
           constraints that impact more than 50% of PJM load (higher
           LMP), a set composed entirely of the primary operating
           interfaces. The number of congested hours increased by 308
           between the years 2000 to 2001 for this group, from 533 to 841
           hours, impacting, on average, 70% of PJM load. Congestion
           increased on the Western and Western Voltage Interfaces by a
                                                                                     Page 68


                     net 388 hours and increased on the Central Interface by 35
                     hours; congestion decreased on the Eastern Interface by 115
                     hours. The Eastern Interface Impacts the 57% of PJM load
                     located in New Jersey, Delaware, Eastern Pennsylvania, and on
                     Maryland's Eastern Shore; the Central Interface also impacts
                     eastern load along with an additional 14% of PJM load located
                     in Central Pennsylvania. The Western Interface and Western
                     Voltage Interface constraints impact these areas as well as load
                     in Western Pennsylvania, Washington D.C., and the Baltimore
                     zone. The results presented in Table 10 show that transmission
                     congestion on the main operating interfaces that impact large
                     amounts of PJM load has increased in frequency and moved
                     west, impacting more PJM load more frequently.
#    Constraint     Percent of   Constrained   Constrained   Change   Percent    Percent    Change
                    PJM Load     Hours 2000    Hours 2001             of Hours   of Hours
                    Impacted                                          2000       2000
1    Western            75           77             493        416        1          6         5
     Interface
2    West Volt          75           111            83         -28       1           1         0
     Interface
3    Central            70            0             35         35        4           3         -1
     Interface
4    Eastern            57           345            227       -118       4           3         -1
     Interface
5    Keeney             25           14             326        312       0           4         4
     500/230
6    Whitpain           14            0             58         58        0           1         1
     500/230
7    Branchbrg-         10            0             124        124       0           1         1
     Flagtown
     230
8    Cedargrove          9           494            378       -116       6           5         -1
     – Roseland
     230
9    Cedargrove          7           18             118        100       0           1         1
     –Clifton 230
10   Bayonne –           5           103            36         -67       1           0         -1
     PVSC 138
                             Table 12 - Constraint Duration Summary

                     Constraints 5 through 7 in [Table12] make up the set of
                     constraints that impact between 10 and 50% of PJM load. The
                     number of congested hours increased by 494, from 14 to 508
                     hours for this group, impacting, on average, 16% of PJM load.
                     Congestion increased for all facilities within the group,
                     especially the Keeney transformers, which is the most severe
                     constraint within the group, impacting 25% of PJM load.
                     Constraints 8 through 10 are the set of constraints that impact
                     between 5 and 10% of PJM load. The number of congested
                     hours remained nearly constant, increasing by 15 hours from
                     615 to 630 hours for this group, impacting, on average, 7% of
                                                                         Page 69


              PJM load. All three of these constraints are located in the
              Northern portion of Public Service Electric & Gas’ area.

Observations by the interview team as a result of interviews with PJM staff
   Ø PJM has the same minimum interconnection reliability standard for generation
      interconnection as the other FERC jurisdictional ISO/RTOs, but IPPs typically
      request and pay for transmission upgrades to ensure deliverability. This may
      be partly a result of the region’s dense population and load areas, which
      means that long transmission lines are not required for IPP integration. Many
      of the transmission enhancements required to ensure deliverability may only
      cost a few million dollars. See Figure 32 for locations of new generation.
   Ø Each state regulatory body reviews and approves the projects associated with
     the utilities under its jurisdiction.




                    Figure 32 - Locations of New Generation

   Ø Five economic bottleneck areas have been identified (see Figure 33), but at
     this time, PJM’s Tariff/Operating Agreement precludes “ordering” economic
     upgrades in the RTEP. In March of 2003 they will file proposed changes to
     their Tariff/Operating Agreement to correct this issue:
         § NW Pennsylvania (Erie West and South)
         § West of Washington DC (Doubs Substation)
         § Delmarva Peninsula
                                                                           Page 70


           §     West Interface (500 kV)
           §     East Interface (500 kV)




                Figure 33 - Transmission Bottlenecks in the PJM Area

Table 13 show the cost and hours per year of congestion in the Delmarva Peninsula
area and Table 14 Shows the causes and percent of time.

               Year       1999        2000        2001         2002
                       (5 months)                           (8 months)
      Cost (million)        $7         $20         $59          $16
      Hours per year       435        2615        3175          860
                  Table 13 – Delmarva Peninsular Congestion

           Causes                      Cost (million)         Percent of
                                                              Time
           Construction Outages            $24                   23%
           High flows with all             $21                   21%
           facilities in service
           Forced Outages                  $24              23%
           Maintenance Outages             $33              33%
              Table 14 – Delmarva Peninsular Congestion – Causes

5. Information on Transmission Congestion from Other Sources

This section supplements the information provided in Section 4 by the six ISOs with
information gathered from four key organizations and agencies that are major
                                                                          Page 71


stakeholders in bottleneck issues: FERC, WGA, NERC, and EEI. This information
reinforces and augments the information gathered from the ISOs.

5.1 Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC)
The information presented in this subsection was taken from the FERC website
www.ferc.gov.

FERC’s Northeast Energy Infrastructure Conference (New York NY, January 31,
2002) focused on creating a snapshot of the current energy infrastructure in the
Northeast for electricity and other energy sources. The information about the
Northeast presented here comes from material presented at that conference by a
representative of the FERC Office of Energy Projects. Figure 34 shows the 11
Northeast states that, along with the District of Columbia, were the focus of the
presentation.




                            Figure 34 – Northeast Region

              Three large merchant transmission projects are under
              development in the Northeast, as shown in [Figure 35]. The
              first, the Neptune Regional Transmission System, is an
              HVDC transmission system that would go from Canada Sub
              C to the Boston and New York City/New Jersey metropolitan
              areas. It has a 4,800-megawatt capacity its estimated cost is
              $4 billion. A second project is the TransEnergy Cross Sound
              Cable that links Connecticut to New York, a 24-mile DC
              transmission cable with a 330-MW capacity at an estimated
              cost of $120 million. The Lake Erie project from Ontario to
              Pennsylvania and Ohio is still in the planning phase. This is
              an approximately 70-mile DC transmission line with a
              capacity of 975 MW.
                                                              Page 72




    Figure 35 - Merchant Transmission Projects

In summer 2001, FERC identified four major transmission
constraints in the Northeast [Figure 36], each of which results
in extra costs for ratepayers. The Southeast Pennsylvania
constraint costs ratepayers an extra $16 million. The Eastern
New York constraint costs ratepayers an extra $64.6 million.
The Southwest Connecticut Interface costs $4 million extra,
and the Northeast-to-Boston constraint cost an additional $60
million.




        Figure 36 – Constraints in the Northeast
                                                                         Page 73


FERC’s Midwest Energy Infrastructure Conference (Chicago, Illinois.
Wednesday, November 13, 2002) focused on creating a snapshot view of the
current total energy infrastructure in the Midwest for electricity and other energy
sources. The information about the Midwest in this subsection comes from a
presentation at that conference by a representative of FERC’s Office of Energy
Projects.

           [Figure 37] shows the 15 states that, for the purposes of the
           discussion at that conference, make up the Midwest region,
           along with the Canadian provinces of Manitoba and
           Saskatchewan. The NERC regions that cover portions of the
           Midwestern states are MAAP, MAIN, ECAR, and the
           Southwest Power Pool (SPP).




                   Figure 37 – Midwest US and Canada

           In 2001, the Midwest imported 10,000 gigawatt hours from
           Manitoba and Saskatchewan and exported slightly more than
           1,500 gigawatt hours to those same provinces [see Figure
           38]. This approximately 8,500-gigawatt-hour net import was
           38 percent of total net imports from Canada to the U.S. and
           represents slightly less than one percent of total Midwest
           consumption.
                                                             Page 74




    Figure 38 – Imports and Exports from Canada

Although the reserve margin for the region appears to be
comfortable, transmission congestion is a serious issue in the
Midwest. Congestion events, as shown here on [Figure 39],
are defined as TLR procedures at level 2-C and above. The
number of TLRs is increasing in MAIN, MAAP, and SPP.
ECAR declined from 2000 to 2001 but remained at the same
level in the summer of 2002. The trend here shows that,
based on TLRs, congestion in the region is worsening.




Figure 39 – Number of TLRs and Trend in the Midwest
                                                             Page 75


[Figure 40] shows that the locations of congestion can vary
for different reasons, e.g., season of the year or temperature
differentials between the Midwest and Southeast. For
example, in summer 2000, the South stayed much hotter than
the North, resulting in congestion in flows from the Midwest
to the Southeast. Time of day can also affect flow patterns as
people turn on lights and heat in different regions of the
country. Power prices and TLRs do not show congestion’s
total economic impact because power prices and transmission
schedules are determined the day before power delivery, and
TLR procedures serve to reschedule generation and
transmission flow schedules. The lack of price signals means
there is no indication of the cost of business lost due to
congestion, and there are no signs or incentives to construct
transmission facilities.




  Figure 40 – Changes in Congestion Location
Several projects in the Midwest are designed to alleviate
congestion; however, these projects are designed to resolve
immediate problems that may affect reliability, especially in
Michigan and Wisconsin. These projects do not reflect the
                                                                             Page 76


              addition of new transmission technology, demand-response
              mechanisms, or generation sited to remedy congestion. The
              lack of adequate transmission projects results not only from
              the lack of price signals but also from the difficulty in siting
              new facilities across multiple jurisdictions where
              environmental and landowner concerns can lead to project
              delays. The formation of RTOs, such as MISO, will help
              mitigate inefficient curtailment of service and, along with
              LMP, will highlight the cost of congestion and encourage
              appropriate projects to relieve congestion.

              Electricity transmission appears to be the weak link in the
              Midwest energy infrastructure, and price signals appear to be
              needed as incentives for transmission expansion to relieve
              congestion. The near-term consequences of inadequate
              transmission in this region will, in the near term, limit the
              movement of electricity at appropriate market prices, and, in
              the future, compromise reliability if investments are not
              made. Important steps toward enabling necessary investment
              in transmission facilities will be full integration of the MISO
              and SPP and implementation of LMP.


5.2 The Western Governors’ Association (WGA)

The information in       this   subsection   comes   from   the   WGA      website     at
www.westgov.org.

As a result of the May 9, 2001, Western Governors’ Association Transmission
Roundtable in Salt Lake City UT, a working group was convened to develop a
conceptual transmission plan for the Western Interconnection, addressing three key
questions:
       1. What transmission enhancements are needed in the Western
            Interconnection?
       2. How can the necessary transmission enhancements be financed?
       3. How can the necessary transmission plans be expeditiously permitted?

A broadly-based group of public-and private-sector representatives participated in the
development of the plan, which focuses on transmission additions needed between
regions within the Western Interconnection (rather than enhancements to meet local
transmission needs).

The excerpts below are sections from the work groups’ August 2001 “Conceptual
Plans for Electricity Transmission in the West Report” to the WGA.

              Predicting Future Bottlenecks:
                                                             Page 77


Transmission expansion and costs to reduce main grid
bottlenecks and integrate new generation in the Western
Interconnected System were identified. Transmission
Bottlenecks are a function of the location and operation of
generation and load on the transmission system. Predicting
future bottlenecks requires assumptions about the
characteristics of future load growth, new generation,
generator availability, transmission projects, fuel costs, and
market and pricing rules. The following analysis reviewed
the need for main grid transmission expansion to meet
assumed generation and load levels in 2010. Generation and
load growth was predicted and future transmission
bottlenecks were identified using production cost modeling
techniques to simulate dispatch and operation, assuming
certain market rules.
Two “bookend” generation expansion scenarios were
developed from a participant survey to bracket the
transmission expansion that might be required on the system.
These generation "bookends" were:
Ø All gas-fired generation expansion (“Gas” scenario),
    mostly close to load areas; and
Ø Coal, wind, hydro, and geothermal expansion (“Other-
    Than-Gas” scenario) located in electrically remote areas.
    The Other-Than-Gas scenarios included gas-fired
    generation already under construction and permitted that
    is mostly located close to large load areas.

Agreement on the generation scenarios allowed the working
group to develop three AC (alternating current) transmission
expansion alternatives for the analysis.
1. 2004 Base transmission system (transmission expected to
   be in service in 2004)
2. 2010 Gas case transmission expansions scenario
3. 2010 Other-Than-Gas case transmission expansion
   scenario

Within the Western Interconnection there are presently
approximately 160,000 megawatts (MW) of existing summer
peak generating capacity of which 41% is hydro, 23% is gas-
fired, 23% is coal-fired, 1% is wind driven, 2% is
geothermal, and the remaining 10% is nuclear and other. To
meet forecasted load in 2010, assuming a 25% reserve
margin, approximately 48,000 MW of additional generation
will be required to bring the total amount of generation in
2010 to approximately 208,000 MW.
                                                               Page 78


Of the generation either under construction or permitted to be
in service by 2004, approximately 95% or 25,000 MW is
fueled with natural gas. With this and other generation under
construction, the mix in 2004 will change to 35% hydro, 33%
gas, 19% coal, 2% wind, 2% geothermal, and 9% other.
[Figure 41] shows the total generation capacity mix by
percentage in the Western Interconnection that currently
exists and is expected by 2004. The graph also shows the
percent generation mix that would occur under: a
predominately gas-fired scenario for 2010; and a scenario
where remotely located coal, wind and geothermal generation
provide the additional power beyond the 25,000 MW of gas-
fired generation that will be in service by 2004.




      Figure 41 – Western Generation Mix Options

Little transmission would be needed to support the 2010 gas
scenario. To move 23,000 MW of remotely located coal,
wind and geothermal generation, more transmission than
expected by 2004 levels would be needed. A conceptual
transmission plan indicating the level of transmission
expansion needed to move this remote power was developed.
The initial capital cost of the transmission projects included
in this scenario is estimated to cost in the range of $8 billion
to $12 billion (2010 dollars). With incremental addition
studies and some optimization, it is possible that the cost of
this transmission plan bookend could be significantly
reduced by $1 billion to $4 billion.
                                                               Page 79



Fuel and variable cost savings were compared for the Gas
Expansion and Other-Than-Gas Expansion plans with and
without their respective transmission expansion plans. From
spreadsheet analysis and, assuming no transmission
constraints on the system, the Other-Than-Gas generation
expansion scenario would save an estimated (2010 dollars)
annual $4.3 billion (Base Average conditions) to $7.1 billion
(High Gas Price conditions) in fuel savings over the Gas
expansion scenario. However, because the new coal, wind,
hydro and geothermal generation in the Other-Than-Gas
scenario is mostly electrically remote, transmission, as
discussed above, needs to be added.

With transmission modeled, production cost studies predicted
a potential $3.3 billion to $5.3 billion annual fuel and
variable cost savings (2010 dollars) for the Other-Than-Gas
scenario, compared with the Gas-Fired generation addition
scenario when transmission expansion was added to facilitate
the respective scenarios.

Existing System and Model Benchmark:
The size of the generation circle in [Figure 42] represents
summer-installed capacity by generation type within each
transmission-constrained area in the Western grid. The width
of the blue line between the circles shows the relative transfer
capacity between the transmission-constrained areas.




            Figure 42 – WECC Existing System
                                                             Page 80



[Figure 43] indicates the amount of exports and imports
between the circles that might be expected during the peak
summer hours under average hydro conditions in the Western
System. The connecting main grid infrastructure is designed
to facilitate these exports. The main grid infrastructure does
not have to move every MW generated to every corner of the
system, only the exports to importing areas. However, the
grid must not only handle these exports during average peak
conditions, but also exports during other likely conditions,
including off-peak hours, peak conditions in seasons other
than summer, extreme load conditions (heat or cold waves),
and conditions in which system elements are out because of
planned maintenance or forced outage.




  Figure 43 – Energy Imports and Exports in the West

A significant amount of transmission on the West Coast links
the hydro generation areas of the Northwest with coastal load
areas. It facilitates the considerable amount and variation of
inexpensive hydro generation that can occur depending on
seasonal water conditions. There also is a significant amount
of transmission between the Desert Southwest areas and
Southern California areas facilitating large amounts of
                                                              Page 81


dedicated coal-fired generation, jointly built and owned by
California and Southwest entities.

Because of the long distances between areas in the Rocky
Mountain States, transmission is limited in the eastern part of
the loop. In this area dominated by coal-fired generation, the
existing transmission is generally tailored to fit specific
generation and exports. These plants supply power to load
centers in the eastern end of the Western Interconnection.
They also supply energy through the limited east side
transmission system to the West Coast and Southwest areas
where hydro and gas peaking capacity is used to shape or
store the energy and follow capacity demand.




   Figure 44a – Actual Line Loading (2000) vs. MAPS
                       Simulation

Figures 44a and b show both historic recorded levels of
"actual flow" and the production cost model’s prediction of
bottlenecks on the existing system. Given the transmission
capability that must be set aside for reliability and system
performance during outages and during other than-average
conditions, a rule of thumb is that a path is considered
heavily loaded if its use exceeds 50% of its rating for the
majority of time. Figures 44a and b shows the amount of time
some of the most heavily loaded paths were loaded to 50%,
75%, 90%, and 95% of their rating during the year 2000. It
does not include times when the path was reserved but not
used, yet unavailable for use on a firm basis. The second set
of bars for each path shows results from the model analysis
                                                          Page 82


which corresponds reasonably with actual flows, thus
providing some confidence in the model's ability to predict
future bottlenecks, when new generation and load is added.
Their location in the Western transmission system is shown
on [Figure 45].




   Figure 44b – Actual Line Loading (2000) vs. MAPS
                       Simulation
                                                                                                                                                                            Page 83



                                    PRINCE RUPERT                         PEACE CANYON
                                                                                                                                Location of Famous Transmission
                                                                                           SUNDANCE                                 Constrained Paths in the
                                                                          MICA
                                                                                            LANGDON                              Western Interconnected System
                                                                                                      LANGDON
                                                          VANCOUVER
                                                  3             AREA
                                                                                                                                   CANAD
                                           SEATTLE            CHIEF JOSEPH
                                             AREA     4                                          8                                 A
                                                                                                                                UNITED STATES
                                                                                             HOT SPRINGS
                                                                      6                                                    FT. PECK


                                    PORTLAND
                                      AREA                    73
                                                                                 HELLS                                           COLSTRIP
                                                              BUCKLEY            CANYON
                                                  5                              14
                                                                   BURNS
                                                                                 BOISE
                                                                                                      18
                                                                                           MIDPOINT         19
                                        66            MALIN
                                                                                      17
                                     SHASTA
                                               ROUND MTN
                                                               65                           20
                                                                                 16
                                               TABLE MTN                                              SALT LAKE
                                                                                                      CITY AREA
                                                                                                                      30                         36
                                                                                 32                                                          DENVER
                                                                                                                                             AREA
                                         SAN FRANCISCO
                                               AREA                                                   34PINTO
                                                      15                         35                                   FOUR            31
                                                                                                        NAVAJO
                                                                                                                 23   CORNERS

                                                                                   HOOVER                  22
                                             26                                         PHOENIX
                                                                                          AREA
                                                                             MOJAVE                                            ALBUQUERQUE
                                           LOS ANGELES         LUGO                         51                                 AREA
                                                 AREA                     DEVERS                      50

                                                                                                                               EL PASO
                                                                                                                               AREA
                                                                                 49
Source: Western
                                                                                                                             MEXICO
Governors’ Association,
                           Path #         WSCC Path Name                           Path #            WSCC Path Name                        Path #          WSCC Path Name
Conceptual Plans for
                            3       Northwest – Canada                                18     Idaho – Montana                                34        Tot 2B
Electricity Transmission    4       West of Cascades – North                          19     Bridger West                                   35        Tot 2C
                            5       West of Cascades – South                          20     Path C                                         36        Tot 3
                            6       West of Hatwai                                    22     Southwest of Four Corners                      49        East of Colorado River
                            8       Montana – Northwest                               23     Four Corners 345/500 kV                        50        Cholla - Pinnacle Peak
                            14      Idaho – Northwest                                 26     No. - So. Calif. Midway-Vincent                51        Southern Navajo
                            15      Midway - Los Banos                                30     Tot 1A                                         65        Pacific DC Intertie
                            16      Idaho – Sierra                                    31     Tot 2A                                         66        California Oregon Intertie (COI)
                            17      Borah West                                        32     Pavant – Gonder 230 kV                         73        North of John Day


                       Figure 45 - Transmission Congestion Paths in the West

                              It should be noted that Path 15 between Northern and
                              Southern California is not on the list because loading data for
                              Path 15 [are] not generally available. However, the Path 15
                              bottleneck is significant and has contributed to price
                              volatility in the West. A special analysis of Path 15 using
                              2001 gas prices and hydro conditions similar to last summer
                              was performed. Results showed congestion and spot market
                              differences ($35 and $65 dollars per megawatt hour) between
                              each end of the path.
                                                                                          Page 84


              [Figure 46] represents the miles of new transmission
              expansion within the WECC during the time period 1989 to
              2000.




      *Note: Circuit miles of transmission are not an absolute indicator of the
      reliability of the transmission systems or their ability to transfer electricity.
                     Figure 46 - WECC Miles of Transmission
                             Expansion 1989 to 2000


5.3 North American Electric Reliability Council (NERC)

Information in this subsection comes from the NERC website is www.nerc.com

NERC Reliability Assessment 2002–2011
The following are excerpts of NERC’s “Reliability Assessment 2002-2011 Report”
that pertain to transmission and related bottlenecks.

        The NERC’s Reliability Assessment Subcommittee (RAS)
        annually reviews the overall reliability of existing and planned
        electric generation and transmission systems of the ten NERC
        Regional Reliability Councils (Regions).         The Reliability
        Assessment 2002–2011 report presents an assessment of electric
        generation and transmission reliability through the Year 2011.
        RAS views this ten-year assessment in two time frames: the near
        term, consisting of the first five years and the long term, the
        balance of the ten-year period.

        Transmission Adequacy
        North American transmission systems are expected to perform
        reliably in the near term. Procedures and processes to mitigate
        potential reliability impacts appear to be working effectively.
        However, portions of the transmission systems are reaching their
                                                                   Page 85


limits as customer demand increases and the systems are subjected
to new loading patterns resulting from increased electricity
transfers. Although the transmission systems are expected to
perform reliably, some areas of the transmission systems are not
adequate to transmit the output of all new generating units to their
desired markets.

Many electricity transfers are influenced by weather diversity
across the continent that frees up resources in one area to serve
demand in another. Because weather patterns are unpredictable in
the long term, transmission constraints and congestion have the
potential to shift from season to season and year to year. Although
some transmission constraints are recurring and well known, new
constraints are appearing as electricity flow patterns change. In
cases where redispatch options have been exhausted or are
ineffective, the only way to remove the constraints is to increase
the capability of the transmission system or build new generation
close to the demand centers, removing the need for the electricity
transfers in the first place. The transmission systems are being
subjected to flows in magnitudes and directions that were not
contemplated when they were designed and for which there is
minimal operating experience. New flow patterns result in an
increasing number of facilities being identified as limits to
transfers, and transmission loading relief (TLR) procedures were
required in areas not previously subject to overloads to maintain
the transmission facilities within operating limits. Reliability
coordinators call for NERC TLRs to manage transactions within
transmission security constraints, which causes a generation
redispatch by restricting scheduled transfers. [Figure 47] shows
the TLR trend for the past six years.

Operating transmission facilities at levels near security limits does
not necessarily translate into an unreliable or unsecured transmission
system; these conditions may instead be an indication that the
transmission system is congested and will not support any further
economic transfers of energy. For example, 2000 saw a significant
increase in the number of TLRs as heavy north-to-south electricity
transfers occurred in the central United States, spurred on by
extended temperature diversity (cool in the north, hot in the south),
which freed up resources for export. In general, TLRs are an
indication that steps must be taken to manage transmission system
loading to avoid placing the system in an insecure state. Several
steps or classifications of NERC TLR exist, ranging from Level 0 to
6.2 Only at TLR levels 5 and higher are firm transactions curtailed.
Although few TLRs 5 and higher have been called since the TLR
procedure was instituted, the number has increased each year. In
                                                                      Page 86


 [Figure 48], the 2002 TLRs listed represent those called through July
 2002.




    Figure 47 - Total Number of Level Two or Higher TLR Logs

Operating transmission facilities at levels near security limits does not
necessarily translate into an unreliable or unsecure transmission
system; these conditions may instead be an indication that the
transmission system is congested and will not support any further
economic transfers of energy. For example, 2000 saw a significant
increase in the number of TLRs as heavy north-to-south electricity
transfers occurred in the central United States, spurred on by extended
temperature diversity (cool in the north, hot in the south), which freed
up resources for export. In general, TLRs are an indication that steps
must be taken to manage transmission system loading to avoid placing
the system in an insecure state. Several steps or classifications of
NERC TLR exist, ranging from Level 0 to 6.2 Only at TLR levels 5
and higher are firm transactions curtailed. Although few TLRs 5 and
higher have been called since the TLR procedure was instituted, the
number has increased each year. In [Figure 48], the 2002 TLRs listed
represent those called through July 2002.
                                                                    Page 87




   Figure 48 - Number of Level Five and Higher TLRs per Year

About 10,100 new circuit miles of transmission facilities (230 kV and
higher) are planned for construction throughout North America [see
Table 15] over the next ten years; the majority of these additions are
planned for the first five years, reflecting uncertainty in long-term
planning. This amount represents a 5% increase in total installed
circuit miles (230 kV and higher) over the ten-year period; most of
these additions are intended to address local transmission concerns or
to connect proposed new generators to the transmission grid and will
not have a significant impact on its capability to transfer electricity
over long distances. This table does not include circuit upgrades or
reconductoring of existing lines. New transmission line construction is
not the only means of ensuring transmission adequacy. In the long
term, reliable transmission will depend upon the close coordination of
generation and transmission planning and construction.
                                                                                    Page 88




     Table 15 - Transmission Circuit Miles 230 kV and Above*
*Note: Circuit miles of transmission are not an absolute indicator of the
reliability of the transmission systems or their ability to transfer electricity.

Transmission Planning
Although the North American transmission systems are expected to
perform reliably, in some areas the transmission grid is not adequate to
transmit the output of all new generating units to their desired markets.
10,300 miles of transmission lines, 230 kV and higher are planned to
be added, while an estimated 159,000–286,000 MW of new generation
may be added by 2011. The planned additions represent an increase of
about 30% in generating capacity over currently installed levels
compared to a 5% increase in transmission. This mismatch of
additions of new transmission lines and new generators may be
attributed to a number of factors.
Ø First, because of the cost and siting requirements associated with
     transmission line construction, transmission is not built on a
     speculative basis; transmission owners will build transmission
     sufficient to serve their customer demands only when they can
     demonstrate a clear need to regulators and the public.
Ø Second, little planned transmission line construction is likely to
     occur to accommodate economic transfers, even if such additions
                                                                       Page 89


   may benefit large numbers of customers. This reluctance to
   construct new transmission facilities is similar to the tragedy of the
   commons in which costs and other negative impacts are
   concentrated on a limited number of parties, although the benefits
   are distributed to all parties. With industry restructuring and the
   development of regional wholesale markets, new transmission
   lines may be economically beneficial to all parties, including the
   consumers of electricity, but their costs are incurred by only one or
   several entities. As a result, those entities may be reluctant to build
   the needed transmission facilities.

Planning Issues - As the electric industry continues to restructure,
identifying those responsible for maintaining adequate electricity
supplies is becoming more difficult. Indeed, the very definition of
what constitutes an adequate electric supply may change in the future.
Transmission expansion as measured by new circuit miles continues to
lag the growth of both the demand for electricity and the addition of
new generating plants. However, alternatives to new transmission lines
exist to maintain the reliability of the system.

Impact of Generation Siting
The siting of new [generation], whether utility or merchant built can
clearly have an impact on the reliability of the interconnected electric
systems. For example, locating new generators electrically close to
demand centers will cause less of a burden on the transmission
systems than generators built in remote locations. In some instances,
constructing new generators near demand centers may actually reduce
transmission system loadings.         The availability of adequate
transmission facilities and the cost of building new facilities to
integrate new generators into the system are factors that help
determine where new generation will be located. Many developers
request only an interconnection to the transmission system (the
minimum transmission investment) with the intent of operating only in
the hourly spot market and do not request firm transmission service to
deliver the output of their plants to customers because this could
trigger costly transmission infrastructure reinforcements. Although
large amounts of new generating capacity will be installed in the next
few years, RAS questions its contribution to NERC-wide adequacy in
cases where capacity will be isolated due to transmission system
constraints [see Figure 49].
                                                                             Page 90




                Figure 49 - Projected New Generation Additions

       As a result of the many changes taking place in the electric industry
       future transmission planning must be accomplished through different
       means than in the past and involve the coordination among many
       different market participants. Market signals and regulatory decisions
       will dictate the location and timing of generating capacity additions,
       and will influence the construction of new transmission facilities.

5.4 Edison Electric Institute (EEI)

Information in this subsection comes from the EEI website is www.eei.org
The following is an excerpt of the paper “Strengthening The Critical Link” by David
K. Owens, executive vice president of the business operations group at EEI.
              While it represents just 11 percent of the national average
              cost of delivered electric power, transmission is the vital link
              to the establishment of robustly competitive wholesale
              markets. Originally designed as a highway to link generators
              to loads and to enhance reliability through interconnections
              with other utilities, the transmission system is being asked to
              perform functions never intended—to operate as a
              superhighway.
              Well functioning wholesale markets, with robust
              transmission networks, will lead to an increase in the
              diversity of supply sources available to evolving retail
              markets, benefiting customers.
                                                                                         Page 91


                 The reality is that the transmission grid is under significant
                 stress, leading some policymakers to conclude that the goal
                 of efficient competitive electric markets is illusory unless
                 transmission is enhanced. Everyone knows it's not as simple
                 as stringing more lines—some policy groundwork needs to
                 be done to strengthen the market, attract investment, and
                 benefit customers.

                 An Urgent Need to Expand Transmission - Expansion of the
                 transmission system certainly has not kept pace with growing
                 electricity demand. Between 1998 and 1999, transmission
                 congestion was up 40 percent; between 1999 and 2000, it was
                 up 140 percent. [See Figure 50]




            Figure 50 – Transmission Congestion (NERC TLRs)




                     Figure 51 – Transmission Investment2

2
 Eric Hirst and Brendan Kirby “Transmission Planning for a Restructured U.S. Electric Industry”,
prepared for Edison Electric Institute June 2001
                                                              Page 92


Moreover, transmission investments have been declining for
almost 25 years at an average rate of $120 million per year.
[See Figure 51] Transmission investment in 1999 was less
than half of what it had been 20 years earlier.
NERC – the reliability watchdog of the bulk power network
– outlined the problem in its "Reliability Assessment 2000-
2009": "Transmission congestion will worsen, and as a result,
transactions will continue to be curtailed until other
appropriate congestion relief measures are implemented. The
continuing upward trend of NERC transmission loading relief
procedures (which allow a transmission owner to decline
transactions to ensure the reliability of its system) during a
relatively mild summer (2000) in the Eastern Interconnection
is indicative of the persistence of congestion in various areas
of the transmission system. Few major transmission system
facility additions are planned for the near future. As
competitive electricity markets continue to develop, it is
likely that the transmission system will be operated at levels
of power flow and in configurations not previously
experienced."
From Need to Resistance - But whatever the need to build
new transmission, getting it built is no easy task. The most
significant obstacle is gaining siting approvals for new
transmission lines, which has become almost impossible
because of myriad challenges in the process of regulatory
review and approval. These obstacles include the
complicated state regulatory review process; involvement of
many local government agencies, the courts, and federal and
tribal governments; and the participation of competing
interest groups. The public sentiment against transmission
expansion is illustrated in the catch-all phrases NIMBY (not
in my backyard), NOPE (not on planet Earth), and BANANA
(build absolutely nothing anywhere near anyone). Indeed,
one only has to look at the trials and tribulations over the
Chicago transmission line project—first proposed in 1996—
linking facilities in Minnesota and Wisconsin. Or the
Wyoming-Cloverdale line proposal to link West Virginia and
southwestern Virginia—a proposal first made in 1990!

The siting situation is likely to become even more
complicated and contentious as regional markets are
developed through FERC's Order 2000. The order requires
RTOs to have a planning process in place for the expansion
of transmission to maintain reliability. This requirement
challenges the traditional belief that transmission facilities
                                                                           Page 93


              serve only small regional or local markets. Thus, it is
              conceivable for the RTO planning process, under FERC's
              approval, to identify new regional transmission that state and
              local authorities flatly reject because they do not perceive a
              direct benefit for constituents.

6. Summary of Key Findings
The challenges and issues the ISO Planning staff face are very similar throughout the
nation. The following were the key findings that resulted from the site visits and
interviews with the ISOs management and staff:

   Ø ISOs have the technical tools and ability to identify current and future
     transmission reliability criteria deficiencies and develop solutions to address
     bottlenecks through upgrades, new lines, and remedial actions schemes.
   Ø ISO’s have the ability to identify the current economically significant
     bottlenecks; however, these tend to shift around based on market conditions.
   Ø Transmission bottlenecks are more acute during extended peak demands, large
     resource outages, major construction projects, high fuel differential costs
     between regions and other market conditions.
   Ø The ISO’s are challenged when asked to develop a business case justifying a
     market economics project and lack the necessary market models to adequately
     forecast and “prove” their need.
   Ø Transforming the transmission network from the historical vertically
     integrated design to an open competitive network that facilitates large regional
     power transfers may have a significant price tag and there are no established
     processes for reviewing and getting approvals to build such facilities.
   Ø ISO transmission expansion plans are shared with market participants for the
     purpose of attracting alternate solutions (i.e., generation, load response).
   Ø Generation interconnection projects dominate the transmission planning
     process.
   Ø The inter-ISO transmission projects under serious review or development are
     DC lines and they are being driven by merchant transmission interests:
              •   Cross Sound (NY-NE), Neptune (PJM-NY), Lake Erie Link (PJM-
                  Canada) and Harbor Cable (PJM-NY)
   Ø Regulatory approval process, especially for multi-state projects, is long and
     consequently may be very uncertain.
   Ø Uncertainty about cost recovery and regulatory treatment provides a
     disincentive for Transmission Owners to do anything more than reliability
     projects.
   Ø There is a disconnect between who pays for new transmission vs. who
     benefits – the customers of the local transmission owner could be straddled
                                                                             Page 94


       with the costs of fixing bottlenecks while those benefiting may be located
       several states away.
   Ø A market design that does not include LMP creates disincentives in many
     cases – congestion costs added to uplift are spread over all users of
     transmission.
   Ø The minimum interconnection standard for new generators does not ensure
     deliverability and as a result it creates stranded generation pockets, does not
     address regional adequacy issues and puts the planning process in a
     reactionary mode.
   Ø Generation solutions have shorter lead times versus those for transmission
     projects and can provide a quicker fix to many bottlenecks, but recent
     generation project cancellations around the nation are creating challenges for
     the grid planners and eventually customers.
   Ø There is limited data available on planned new generation projects to support
     ISO long term planning studies.
   Ø Among the six ISOs there is not a common definition or method of
     monitoring and tracking congestion.

7. Transmission Bottlenecks Sorted and Prioritized
    The Electricity Advisory Board’s report states that “‘A National Interest
    Transmission Bottleneck’ must meet at least one of the following criteria”:
       Ø The bottleneck jeopardizes national security
       Ø The bottleneck creates a risk of widespread grid reliability problems or the
          likelihood that major customer load centers will be without adequate
          electricity supplies
       Ø The bottleneck creates the risk of significant consumer cost increases in
          electricity markets that could have serious consequences for the national
          or a broad regional economy or the risk of significant consumer cost
          increases over an area or region

   In addition to the “national interest” criteria specified above, the subcommittee
   believes that the following factors could appropriately be used to provide
   additional support for particular facilities being identified as a “National Interest
   Transmission Bottleneck”:
       Ø Does the level of congestion result in an unacceptable number of
          transmission loading relief (“TLR”) events?
       Ø Does the level of congestion result in unacceptably high price differentials
          across an interface?
       Ø Does the transmission deficiency increase the likelihood that market
          power will be exercised in a manner contrary to the public interest?

Using the criteria noted above and supplemental information from each ISO, the
bottlenecks identified by the ISOs were sorted according to their impacts on grid
                                                                             Page 95


reliability and market economics and prioritized according to their impact on the
national interest.

List of ISO Bottlenecks Sorted By Impacts:




                  Table 16 – ISO Bottlenecks Sorted By Impacts

List of ISO Bottlenecks Sorted By Priority:
Based on the information received during the interview process, impacts the
bottlenecks have on reliability and markets and the cost data (see Figure52) the
priority for addressing the ISOs bottlenecks are as follows:
      Priority       ISO                       Comment
          1        NYISO       Congestion costs over a three year period
                               are averaging in excess of $900 million
                               per year.
          2        ISO-NE      Load is at risk

         3        CAISO       California has two significant load
                              pockets that are forecasted to be in
                              violation or reliability criteria and a path
                                                                          Page 96


                            that has inhibited transactions between
                            the northern and southern portions of the
                            state.
        4         PJM       PJM’s congestion costs continue a four
                            year trend of almost doubling each year,
                            but the majority of 2002 increase is a
                            result of adding PJM West to its market.
         5        MISO      At this time, the true congestion costs are
                            unknown. Region will have difficulty
                            operating an efficient market with the
                            limited EVH infrastructure in the region.
        6        ERCOT      ERCOT will need to expand its transfer
                            capability to accommodate new
                            generation and achieve market efficiency.
                 Table 17 – ISO Bottlenecks Sorted By Priority




               Figure 52 - ISO Congestion Costs by Year

List of Transmission Project Costs:
Table 18 below indicates the costs associated with some of the proposed transmission
projects to relieve congestion:
       ISO                           Project                         Cost (Million)

    CAISO      Path 26                                                    $306
               Imports into San Diego                                     $252

    ERCOT      Two 345 kV lines from West Texas to North                  $140
               Texas
                                                              Page 97



MISO     Vision EHV Infrastructure                           $7,000
         Gains Substation – add a second 345/138 kV            $7
         transformer bank – needed to serve load growth in
         the area of Grand Rapids, Michigan

NYISO    Marcy-New Scotland 345 kV circuit – line             $75
         originally built for 765 kV could be converted
         from single to double circuit
         Rebuild two 115 kV lines out of Leeds to 345 kV     $225

ISO-NE   Build a 345 kV loop around the Southwestern         $600
         Connecticut area (Phase 1 and 2)
         Reinforce Northwest Vermont load pocket             $125

 PJM     Adding 500/230 kV transformers at Doubs              $22
         Substation (Northwest of Washington, DC)
               Table 18 – Transmission Project Costs
                                                                              Page 98


                                     8. References
[1]   “National Transmission Grid Study” - U.S. Department of Energy, May 2002.
      Available on the Internet at http://tis.eh.doe.gov/ntgs/

[2] “Transmission Grid Solutions Report” – DOE Electricity Advisory Board,
    Transmission Grid Solution Subcommittee report to DOE, September 2002.
    Available on the Internet at http://www.eab.energy.gov/

[3] California Independent System Operator’s web site home page is
    www.caiso.com and Transmission Planning information is located at
    www1.caiso.com/thegrid/planning

[4] Armando Pereze’s rebuttal testimony on behalf of the CAISO before the CPUC,
    for a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity Authorizing the
    Construction of the Los Banos-Gates 500 kV Transmission Project, November
    15, 2001

[5]   Electric Reliability Council of Texas web site home page is www.ercot.com/
      and Transmission Planning information is located at -
      www.ercot.com/Participants/SystemPlanning.htm

[6] “2002 Report on Existing and Potential Electric System Constraints and Needs
    within the ERCOT Region”, presented by Kenneth A. Donohoo, ERCOT’s
    Manager System Planning Transmission Services, November 5, 2002

[7]   Midwest ISO’s web site home page is www.midwestiso.org and its
      Transmission Planning information is located at
      www.midwestiso.org/plan_inter/index.shtml

[8] “Power the Plaines” presentation by Dale Osborn, MISO, in his on Sept. 9,
    2002,

[9]   New York Independent System Operator’s web site home page is
      www.nyiso.com and the Transmission Planning site is
      www.nyiso.com/services/planning.html

[10] NPCC’s Guidelines for Area Transmission Reviews, revision date November
     7, 2001 www.nyiso.com/services/planning.html

[11] “ The TX-Factor in the Development of Competitive Electricity Markets”, Prepared by
      the New York Independent System Operator for the New York State Public Service
      Commission Version 2, 11/26/2002

[12] New England Independent System Operator web site home page is www.iso-
     ne.com and the URL for the Regional Transmission Expansion Plan (RETEP02)
     is www.iso-ne.com/transmission/Regional_Transmission_Expansion_
      Plan/Transmission_ Expansion_Advisory_Committee/
                                                                           Page 99



[13] PJM Interconnection web site home page is www.pjm.com and the Regional
     Transmission Expansion Plan can be located by selecting “Regional
     Transmission Expansion Planning” on the home page.

[14] PJM’s “State of the Market Report, Section 1, 2002”, -
     http://www.pjm.com/market_monitoring/reports/mar/20030305_som_final_web.pdf

[15] FERC’s Northeast Energy Infrastructure Conference, Overview of Energy
     Infrastructure by Jeff Wright, Office of Energy Projects, FERC, New York,
     New York, January 31, 2002. Available on the Internet at www.ferc.gov

[16] FERC’s Midwest Energy Infrastructure Conference, Overview of Energy
     Infrastructure by Jeff Wright, Office of Energy Projects, FERC, Chicago,
     Illinois, November 13, 2002. Available on the Internet at www.ferc.com

[17] FERC’s Southeast Energy Infrastructure Conference, Overview of Energy
     Infrastructure by Jeff Wright, Office of Energy Projects, FERC, Orlando,
     Florida, May 9, 2002. Available on the Internet at www.ferc.com

[18] “Conceptual Plans for Electricity Transmission in the West Report” to the
      Western Governors’ Association, August 2001. The WGA’s website is
      www.westgov.org.

[19] “Reliability Assessment 2002-2011 Report” to the North American Electric
      Reliability Council (NERC) Board. Available on the Internet at NERC’s
      website is www.nerc.com

[20] “Strengthening the Critical Link” – David Owens, Edison Electric Institute
      report, 2001. Available on the Internet at EEI’s website www.eei.org
