                United States Government Accountability Office
                Report to Congressional Committees




                COAST GUARD
August 2024




                Complete
                Performance and
                Operational Data
                Would Better Clarify
                Arctic Resource
                Needs




GAO-24-106491
                                             August 2024

                                             COAST GUARD
                                             Complete Performance and Operational Data Would
                                             Better Clarify Arctic Resource Needs
Highlights of GAO-24-106491, a report to
congressional committees




Why GAO Did This Study                       What GAO Found
The United States, by virtue of Alaska,      The Coast Guard has assessed risks, such as from climate change and
is an Arctic nation with substantial         increased maritime activity, that affect its ability to carry out its missions in the
regional interests. Increasing Arctic        U.S. Arctic region. It has also identified these risks in various planning
activity, risks, and geopolitical tensions   documents, including the Coast Guard Arctic strategy.
mean that the Coast Guard and its key
federal partners, such as DOD, face          The Coast Guard manages Arctic risks like responding to maritime incidents by
growing responsibilities. These include      forward deploying cutter and aviation assets into the U.S. Arctic region to reduce
assessing and managing risks to              its transit and response times. The Coast Guard also deploys assets to provide a
maritime safety, security, and               presence there but has not always been able to meet its planned deployment
environment, as well as to non-              commitments recently. Coast Guard reports for the region that document asset
maritime national security.                  resource use and mission performance for operational planning did not have
The James M. Inhofe National Defense         complete information from fiscal year 2016 through fiscal year 2021. For
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023       example, some years did not include targets for key missions (e.g., maritime law
includes a provision for GAO to review       enforcement). Reports were also unavailable for fiscal years 2022 and 2023.
Coast Guard Arctic operations and            Collecting and reporting complete information would better position the Coast
infrastructure. This report addresses        Guard to make more informed operational planning decisions for the region.
(1) the extent to which the Coast            Additionally, the Coast Guard Arctic implementation plan outlines initiatives and
Guard has assessed and planned for
                                             actions that it intends to take to execute strategic objectives identified in its Arctic
its Arctic risks, and identified the
                                             strategy and to support the national Arctic strategy. However, the plan generally
resources needed to do so, and (2)
how the Coast Guard has collaborated
                                             does not include key metrics such as performance measures, targets, or time
with DOD to assess and manage Arctic         frames for action items. This may make it difficult for the Coast Guard to plan
risks. GAO reviewed and analyzed             activities, determine resource needs, assess its progress toward strategic
Coast Guard risk assessment and              objectives, and ensure its efforts are aligned with national efforts.
management and performance
                                             Coast Guard Polar Icebreaker Healy
documents and interviewed officials
from the Coast Guard, DOD, and other
relevant Arctic stakeholders, including
White House, State of Alaska, and
Alaska Native officials.

What GAO Recommends
GAO is recommending that Coast
Guard ensure that (1) it collects and
reports complete information about
resource use and mission
performance, and (2) its Arctic
implementation plan includes
performance measures with associated
targets and timeframes for action
items. The Department of Homeland
Security concurred with both                 The Coast Guard and Department of Defense (DOD) described collaborating in
recommendations and identified               the Arctic to assess and manage risks in several ways, including sharing relevant
planned actions to address them.             information and expertise and providing operational assistance. For example,
                                             both agencies collaborated on the development of their Arctic strategies and
View GAO-24-106491. For more information,    collaborate to improve domain awareness in the Arctic. They also provide
contact Heather MacLeod at (202) 512-8777    operational support to each other, such as the Coast Guard providing search and
or macleodh@gao.gov.
                                             rescue coverage for DOD during a biennial exercise.
                                                                                        United States Government Accountability Office
Contents


Letter                                                                                 1
              Background                                                               4
              Coast Guard Has Assessed and Planned for Arctic Risks, but Has
                Incomplete Information for Determining Resources Needs                 9
              Coast Guard and the Department of Defense Collaborate on
                Arctic Issues in Various Ways                                        22
              Conclusions                                                            26
              Recommendations for Executive Action                                   27
              Agency Comments and Our Evaluation                                     27

Appendix I    Comments from the Department of Homeland Security                      30



Appendix II   GAO Contact and Staff Acknowledgments                                  32


Tables
              Table 1: Coast Guard Planning Documents, Descriptions, and
                      Participants                                                   10
              Table 2: Completeness of Coast Guard District 17 Performance
                      Report Elements                                                17

Figures
              Figure 1: Map of Coast Guard District 17 Area of Operations and
                       Associated Arctic Boundary                                     5
              Figure 2: Coast Guard Polar Icebreaker Healy                            7
              Figure 3: Air and Sea Travel Distances in Alaska                       12
              Figure 4: Coast Guard Strategic Commitments and Cutter
                       Deployment Days to the U.S. Arctic Region, fiscal years
                       2016–2023                                                     14
              Figure 5: Analysis of Coast Guard Arctic Implementation Plan
                       Action Items                                                  20




              Page i                                            GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
Abbreviations

DHS               Department of Homeland Security
DOD               Department of Defense
FY                fiscal year




This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the
United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety
without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain
copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be
necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately.




Page ii                                                        GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
                       Letter




441 G St. N.W.
Washington, DC 20548




                       August 13, 2024

                       The Honorable Maria Cantwell
                       Chair
                       The Honorable Ted Cruz
                       Ranking Member
                       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
                       United States Senate

                       The Honorable Sam Graves
                       Chairman
                       The Honorable Rick Larsen
                       Ranking Member
                       Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure
                       House of Representatives

                       The United States, by virtue of Alaska, is an Arctic nation with substantial
                       security and economic interests in the region. 1 In recent years, there has
                       been an escalation of great power competition among the United States,
                       Russia, and China, which has introduced tension into the Arctic’s
                       geopolitical environment. The effects of climate change, technological
                       advancements, and economic opportunities have driven increasing
                       interest and activity in the Arctic region, including increased maritime
                       activity. This has also driven increasing risks.

                       Since the Arctic is largely a maritime domain, the U.S. Coast Guard
                       (Coast Guard), a multimission military service within the Department of
                       Homeland Security (DHS), plays a key role in Arctic policy
                       implementation and enforcement. 2 As more navigable ocean water has
                       emerged in the Arctic region and human activity increases, the Coast
                       Guard and key federal partners such as the Department of Defense

                       1The Arctic Research and Policy Act of 1984 defined the Arctic as “all United States and
                       foreign territory north of the Arctic Circle and all United States territory north and west of
                       the boundary formed by the Porcupine, Yukon, and Kuskokwim Rivers; all contiguous
                       seas, including the Arctic Ocean and the Beaufort, Bering, and Chukchi Seas; and the
                       Aleutian chain.” Pub. L. No. 98-373, tit. I, § 112, 98 Stat. 1242, 1248 (codified at 15 U.S.C.
                       § 4111).
                       2For the purposes of this report, we are focusing on the Coast Guard’s area of
                       responsibility and operations around the State of Alaska. This area includes a portion of
                       the Arctic (as defined by the Arctic Research and Policy Act of 1984) as well as the region
                       below the Arctic that includes the rest of the State of Alaska, its shoreline, and the
                       surrounding seas. See figure 1.



                       Page 1                                                           GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
(DOD) face growing responsibilities to assess and manage risks,
including those to maritime safety, security, and the environment, as well
as to nonmaritime aspects of national security. 3

We were asked to review Coast Guard Arctic operations. 4 This report
addresses (1) the extent to which the Coast Guard has assessed and
planned for its Arctic risks, and identified the resources needed to do so,
and (2) how the Coast Guard has collaborated with DOD to assess and
manage Arctic risks.

To address the first objective, we reviewed and analyzed Coast Guard
documents from 2016 through 2023 related to Arctic risk assessment and
management as well as planned actions, including the Coast Guard’s
2019 Arctic Strategic Outlook (Coast Guard Arctic strategy), and its 2023
Arctic Strategic Outlook Implementation Plan (Coast Guard Arctic
implementation plan). 5 We also reviewed Contingency Response
Concept Plans, Operational Planning Direction documents, and
Operational Performance Assessment Reports (performance reports),
which included data on Coast Guard mission resource hours and mission
performance targets, for Coast Guard Pacific Area, Atlantic Area, and
District 17 in Alaska. 6 We assessed the reliability of the data used in the
Coast Guard performance reports by reviewing related documentation as
well as through interviews and written responses from knowledgeable


3Federal agencies participating in national Arctic efforts include DHS and some of its
components, such as the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Transportation
Security Administration, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, and the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency. Non-DHS entities include DOD, the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, the Department of Energy, and the Environmental Protection
Agency, among others. For more information, see The White House, Implementation Plan
for the 2022 National Strategy for the Arctic Region (Washington, D.C.: Oct. 18, 2023).
4The James M. Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023 includes a
provision for us to study Coast Guard Arctic operations and infrastructure and to submit a
report on the findings of the study to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of
the House of Representatives. See Pub. L. No. 117-263, div. K, tit. CXII, subtit. C,
§ 11220(c), 136 Stat. 2395, 4020.
5We selected 2016 as our starting point because our last report on Coast Guard Arctic
operations was issued in 2016. See GAO, Coast Guard: Arctic Strategy Is Underway, but
Agency Could Better Assess How Its Actions Mitigate Known Arctic Capability Gaps,
GAO-16-453 (Washington, D.C.: June 15, 2016); United States Coast Guard, Arctic
Strategic Outlook (Washington, D.C.: Apr. 2019); and United States Coast Guard, Arctic
Strategic Outlook Implementation Plan (Washington, D.C.: Oct. 3, 2023).
6Pacific Area and District 17 are described in the background of this report.




Page 2                                                          GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
officials. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for
reporting on Coast Guard performance information.

We evaluated the Coast Guard Arctic implementation plan and the
performance reports against the Coast Guard’s Framework for Strategic
Mission Management, Enterprise Risk Stewardship, and Internal Control
to determine Coast Guard criteria for implementing and tracking progress
toward strategic objectives. 7 We reviewed Coast Guard guidance on
standard operational planning and global force management to determine
requirements for developing performance reports. 8 We also interviewed
Coast Guard officials about how they assess, manage, and mitigate risks
to Coast Guard operations and infrastructure, commercial maritime
operations, and the maritime environment in the Arctic region. We
conducted a site visit to Juneau, Alaska, to interview officials from Coast
Guard District 17 and the Marine Exchange of Alaska.

To address the second objective, we reviewed Coast Guard and DOD
collaboration efforts in the Arctic region. These included Arctic risk
assessment documents and interagency agreements with DOD, including
the DOD service branches and relevant combatant commands—Northern
Command, European Command, and Indo-Pacific Command. We also
reviewed Arctic strategies from DOD, Air Force, Navy, and Army. 9 We
interviewed DOD officials from headquarters, Northern Command, and
Navy about how they collaborate with the Coast Guard on Arctic risk
assessments. We also interviewed Coast Guard officials from
headquarters and the field about how they collaborate with DOD.




7United States Coast Guard, Deputy Commandant for Operations, Framework for
Strategic Mission Management, Enterprise Risk Stewardship, and Internal Control
(Washington, D.C.: July 2020).
8United States Coast Guard, Commandant Instruction 3120.4B: Coast Guard Standard
Operational Planning Process/Global Force Management (Washington, D.C.: Dec. 9,
2021) and United States Coast Guard, Global Force Management (GFM) 2.0 Process
Guide (Washington, D.C.: Aug. 2023).
9Department of Defense, Report to Congress: Department of Defense Arctic Strategy
(Washington, D.C.: June 2019), Department of the Air Force, The Department of the Air
Force Arctic Strategy: Ensuring a Stable Arctic Through Vigilance, Power Projection,
Cooperation, and Preparation (Washington, D.C.: July 21, 2020), Department of the Navy,
a Blue Arctic: A Strategic Blueprint for the Arctic (Washington, D.C., Jan. 5, 2021), and
Department of the Army, Regaining Arctic Dominance: The U.S. Army in the Arctic
(Washington, D.C., Jan. 19, 2021).




Page 3                                                       GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
                        To address both objectives, we reviewed the National Strategy for the
                        Arctic Region (national Arctic strategy) to identify Arctic risks. 10 We
                        reviewed and analyzed the Implementation Plan for the National Strategy
                        for the Arctic Region (national Arctic implementation plan) to identify
                        planned actions relevant to the Coast Guard. 11 We interviewed officials
                        from the Arctic Executive Steering Committee about their coordination
                        with federal agencies on risk assessment, risk management, and agency
                        progress on completing assigned actions from the national Arctic
                        implementation plan. 12 Finally, we interviewed other relevant stakeholders
                        who have knowledge of or a role in federal Arctic efforts to gain their
                        perspectives. This included officials from the National Oceanic and
                        Atmospheric Administration, the Ted Stevens Center for Arctic Security
                        Studies, the Polar Institute at the Wilson Center, the State of Alaska, the
                        Alaska Federation of Natives, and the Marine Exchange of Alaska.

                        We conducted this performance audit from January 2023 to August 2024
                        in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
                        Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
                        sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
                        findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
                        the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
                        conclusions based on our audit objectives.


Background
Coast Guard Roles and   The Coast Guard is responsible for protecting and defending more than
Responsibilities        100,000 miles of U.S. coastline and inland waterways. Of these, over
                        47,300 miles is shoreline throughout Alaska and the U.S. Arctic region.
                        To carry out its missions, the Coast Guard is organized into two
                        commands, Pacific Area and Atlantic Area. Each area oversees multiple
                        districts, and each district oversees multiple sectors, which conduct
                        missions at the local and port level. 13 The Coast Guard’s District 17,


                        10The White House, National Strategy for the Arctic Region (Washington, D.C.: Oct.
                        2022).
                        11The White House, Implementation Plan for the 2022 National Strategy for the Arctic
                        Region.
                        12We discuss the Arctic Executive Steering Committee later in this report.

                        13According to Coast Guard officials, as of October 2023, the area commanders have
                        implemented a unified command and control structure called Coast Guard Task Force-
                        Arctic to carry out Arctic missions that are not specific missions of their districts or sectors.




                        Page 4                                                             GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
within Pacific Area, has responsibility for over 3.85 million square miles of
territory throughout Alaska and the U.S. Arctic region. 14 For the purposes
of this report, when we refer to the U.S. Arctic region we are referring to
the area that includes the State of Alaska, its shoreline, and the
surrounding seas that generally align with Coast Guard District 17’s area
of responsibility and operations. 15 See figure 1 below for District 17’s area
of operations, including key locations within it, and the associated Arctic
boundary line.

Figure 1: Map of Coast Guard District 17 Area of Operations and Associated Arctic
Boundary




14The Pacific Area geographic area of responsibility ranges from the U.S. western states
to Asia and from the Arctic to Antarctica.
15The Coast Guard also has responsibilities and conducts Arctic missions outside the U.S.
Arctic region, including in the European Arctic, Canadian Arctic, and north of the Russian
Arctic. For example, Coast Guard aircraft conduct reconnaissance flights to locate
icebergs in support of the International Ice Patrol, and it also participates in the Arctic
Coast Guard Forum, an organization made up of Arctic countries dedicated to fostering
safe, secure, and environmentally responsible maritime activity in the Arctic.




Page 5                                                        GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
Coast Guard Arctic Assets   The Coast Guard’s mission responsibilities for the U.S. Arctic region
and Operations              include marine safety, marine environmental protection, search and
                            rescue, aids to navigation, ice operations, and living marine resources,
                            among others. 16 It carries out its missions and other operations in the
                            Arctic region using various types of assets and personnel, including polar
                            icebreakers, as well as large ships and aircraft that can operate in harsh
                            conditions.

                            The Coast Guard polar icebreaker Healy deploys annually to the Arctic
                            region in support of national objectives and research efforts for several
                            federal agencies (see fig. 2 below). 17 The other large Coast Guard cutters
                            conducting missions in the region are based both within and outside of
                            District 17’s area of responsibility, and they deploy to multiple locations
                            around Alaska and the U.S. Arctic region. 18 The aircraft operating in this
                            region are mostly long-range fixed wing aircraft and medium-range
                            helicopters. 19 They are mostly based within District 17 at Air Station
                            Kodiak and Air Station Sitka, which are located below the U.S. Arctic
                            region (see fig. 1 above).




                            16See Homeland Security Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-296, tit. VIII, subtit. H, § 888, 116
                            Stat. 2135, 2249 (codified at 6 U.S.C. § 468). The Coast Guard’s other five missions, also
                            conducted in the U.S. Arctic, include ports, waterways, and coastal security; drug
                            interdiction; migrant interdiction; defense readiness; and other law enforcement.
                            17In addition to the Healy, the Coast Guard operates the polar icebreaker Polar Star,
                            which usually conducts operations in Antarctica. For further information, see GAO, Coast
                            Guard: Observations on Arctic Requirements, Icebreakers, and Coordination with
                            Stakeholders, GAO-12-254T (Washington, D.C.: Dec. 1, 2011). See also 6 U.S.C
                            § 468(a)(1)(F) (providing for ice operations as one of Coast Guard’s missions); Coast
                            Guard and Maritime Transportation Act of 2012, Pub. L. No. 112-213, tit. II, § 217(1), 126
                            Stat. 1540, 1556 (codified at 14 U.S.C. § 102(4)) (providing for the development,
                            establishment, maintenance, and operation of ice facilities as one of Coast Guard’s
                            primary duties).
                            18According to the Coast Guard, its cutters are vessels 65 feet in length or greater with
                            accommodations for crew to live aboard, and the ability to carry multiple types of smaller
                            craft. Most cutters of more than 200 feet in length are capable of accommodating
                            helicopters.
                            19HC-130 fixed wing aircraft and MH-60 helicopters deploy year-round for response
                            missions. MH-60s are also deployed from July through October each year to a forward
                            operating location in Kotzebue, Alaska, to enhance search and rescue capability during
                            periods of increased vessel traffic.




                            Page 6                                                         GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
                       Figure 2: Coast Guard Polar Icebreaker Healy




Coast Guard Planning   To communicate strategic commitments to operational commanders and
Process, Resource      allocate resources by asset type throughout its chain of command, the
                       Coast Guard uses its Standard Operational Planning Process. 20 As part
Allocation, and
                       of this process, Coast Guard headquarters develops an annual Strategic
Performance Reports    Planning Direction, which is the primary mechanism for allocating
                       resources and providing strategic direction to operational commanders.
                       One of the inputs used to develop the Strategic Planning Direction are
                       quarterly performance reports submitted by areas and districts.

                       According to Coast Guard guidance, the performance reports are
                       quarterly summaries of Coast Guard operations and provide quantitative
                       and qualitative information on mission performance and resource hours
                       expended. These reports are used to identify capability gaps and ways
                       that the Coast Guard can improve its operational effectiveness.




                       20Strategic commitments are resource allocations that Coast Guard headquarters deems
                       critical to the implementation of national, DHS, and Coast Guard strategic priorities.




                       Page 7                                                      GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
National Arctic Strategy   The Arctic Executive Steering Committee was created by executive order
and Planning for Federal   in 2015 to provide guidance to executive departments and agencies and
                           enhance coordination of federal Arctic policies across agencies; offices;
Efforts
                           state, local, and Alaska Native Tribal governments; and other
                           stakeholders. 21 In October 2022, the White House issued an updated
                           national Arctic strategy which describes the U.S. agenda and policy in the
                           region over the next 10 years. 22

                           In October 2023, the White House issued the national Arctic
                           implementation plan to describe the methodology, process, and approach
                           for executing the national Arctic strategy, including steps for federal
                           agencies to implement. 23 According to the Executive Director of the Arctic
                           Executive Steering Committee, the National Security Council and the
                           Arctic Executive Steering Committee co-led the development of the
                           national Arctic implementation plan, which involved over 40 federal
                           entities. Other interagency groups such as the Interagency Arctic
                           Research Policy Committee and the U.S. Committee on the Marine
                           Transportation System have Arctic functions, and the U.S. Department of
                           State serves as the overall lead for U.S. Arctic diplomatic efforts. 24 The
                           Executive Director of the Arctic Executive Steering Committee stated that
                           the level of participation from across the federal government was a key
                           influence on the scope and level of detail in the implementation plan.

                           To monitor agencies’ progress, the Executive Director of the Arctic
                           Executive Steering Committee stated that the committee expects
                           agencies to report on the implementation of their respective action items.
                           According to the Executive Director, the committee intends to monitor


                           21See Exec. Order No. 13689, Enhancing Coordination of National Efforts in the Arctic, 80
                           Fed. Reg. 4191 (Jan. 26, 2015). The Arctic Executive Steering Committee includes the
                           Deputy Secretary or equivalent officer from a range of federal agencies, including DHS. It
                           can also include other agencies or offices as determined appropriate by the Chair. The
                           Coast Guard is involved in Arctic Executive Steering Committee activities.
                           22The White House, National Strategy for the Arctic Region. According to the Executive
                           Director of the Arctic Executive Steering Committee, the National Security Council led
                           development of the national Arctic strategy.
                           23The White House, Implementation Plan for the 2022 National Strategy for the Arctic
                           Region.
                           24The Department of State leads U.S. participation in the Arctic Council and coordinates
                           with the other federal agencies in the U.S. delegation. For more information on U.S.
                           priorities in the Arctic and interactions with foreign partners on Arctic issues, see GAO,
                           Arctic Region: Factors That Facilitate and Hinder the Advancement of U.S. Priorities,
                           GAO-23-106002 (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 6, 2023).




                           Page 8                                                           GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
                            agency progress through a tracking tool that includes action items from
                            the national Arctic implementation plan as well as periodically updating
                            the plan to create greater uniformity. Meeting minutes indicate that the
                            status of agency results was discussed at the March 2024 Arctic
                            Executive Steering Committee quarterly meeting. The Executive Director
                            stated that the committee would like to adopt standardized goals with time
                            frames in future updates to the national Arctic implementation plan. The
                            committee plans to start these updates in the summer of 2024 and
                            complete them by early fiscal year 2025.


Coast Guard Has
Assessed and
Planned for Arctic
Risks, but Has
Incomplete
Information for
Determining
Resources Needs
Coast Guard Has             The Coast Guard has identified and assessed risks—such as from
Identified and Assessed     climate change and increased maritime activity—that affect its ability to
                            carry out its missions in the Arctic region and included this information in
Arctic Risks and Included   various planning documents. 25 These include the Coast Guard’s Arctic
Them in Various Planning    strategy and region-specific documents, such as all-hazards concept
Documents                   plans for Pacific Area and District 17, which identify risks specific to their
                            operations. Maritime stakeholder committees have also worked in
                            conjunction with the Coast Guard to identify security and marine




                            25We focused on Arctic-specific risks that could affect the Coast Guard’s operations in that
                            region. We have previously reported on broader challenges to Coast Guard operations
                            such as workforce planning issues, which could affect its Arctic operations, but we do not
                            address these issues in this report. For more information on workforce planning, see
                            GAO, Coast Guard: Actions Needed to Evaluate the Effectiveness of Organizational
                            Changes and Determine Workforce Needs, GAO-20-223 (Washington, D.C.: Feb. 26,
                            2020), GAO, Coast Guard: Increasing Mission Demands Highlight Importance of
                            Assessing Its Workforce Needs, GAO-22-106135 (Washington, D.C.: July 27, 2022); and
                            GAO, Coast Guard: Deployable Operations Group Achieving Organizational Benefits, but
                            Challenges Remain, GAO-10-433R (Washington, D.C.: Apr. 7, 2010).




                            Page 9                                                         GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
                                                               environmental risks in planning documents specific to their areas of
                                                               operation (see table 1).

Table 1: Coast Guard Planning Documents, Descriptions, and Participants

 Planning Document                                                Description of Document
 Coast Guard Arctic Strategy                                      Identifies a range of risks, including security risks from increased militarization of the
 (Participants: Coast Guard)                                      Arctic region and potential conflict with Russia or China; and safety risks from more
                                                                  frequent and intense winter storms and greater shipping traffic that raise the risk of
                                                                  potential mass rescue operations. This strategy also identifies environmental risks,
                                                                  such as coastal and river erosion, marine oil spills and other pollution, and damage to
                                                                  the marine ecosystem from illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing. It also
                                                                  identifies risks to regional communities due to changing availability of and access to
                                                                  subsistence resources.
 Coast Guard Arctic Implementation Plan                           Consists of 14 interconnected initiatives for carrying out the Coast Guard Arctic
 (Participants: Coast Guard)                                      strategy with the lead organizations/offices responsible for overseeing implementation,
                                                                  and action items that represent next steps to advance the Coast Guard Arctic strategy.
                                                                  According to Coast Guard officials, the plan is scalable to adapt to the dynamic nature
                                                                  of Arctic challenges and to the U.S. Coast Guard’s available resources.
 All-Hazards Concept Plans                                        Describe a range of hazards and contingences, including natural and manmade
 (Participants: Coast Guard)                                      disasters, assumptions about and potential impacts of an incident, pre-incident
                                                                  preparedness activities by the Coast Guard, and support to and from other agencies.
                                                                  Examples of contingencies include maritime mass rescue operations, maritime
                                                                  transportation system disruptions, and maritime homeland defense.
 Area Maritime Security Plans                                     Identify critical port infrastructure, operations, and security risks, and determine
 Area Maritime Security Committees                                mitigation strategies and implementation methods. According to Coast Guard officials,
                                                                  this is a primary risk assessment that uses a risk analysis model to evaluate the
 (Participants: federal, state, territorial or                    likelihood of security risks. These risks are evaluated by Coast Guard officials and
 Tribal government; local public safety, crisis                   used to conduct Area Maritime Security Assessments and to inform Area Maritime
 management, and emergency response                               Security Plans.
 agencies; the maritime industry; and other
 port stakeholders)
 Area Contingency Plans                                           Identify plans for oil and hazardous substance spill response, incident management,
 Area Committees                                                  and all-hazards preparedness. The plans serve as a primary risk assessment for
                                                                  marine environmental risks and include more qualitative scenarios and stakeholder
 (Participants: federal, Tribal, state, and local                 involvement to identify emerging risks and prepare responses.
 government agencies; as well as
 representatives from industry, environmental,
 and non-governmental organizations, and oil
 spill removal organizations)
Sources: GAO analysis of Coast Guard documents and interviews with Coast Guard officials. | GAO-24-106491




                                                               Page 10                                                           GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
Coast Guard Has Taken
Steps to Manage Arctic
Risks but Limited Asset
Availability and Incomplete
Data Hinder These Efforts
Coast Guard Has Two Key           The Coast Guard mitigates operational risks in the Arctic region by
Approaches for Mitigating         forward deploying assets to the area and by participating in exercises with
Operational Risks in the Arctic   its partners. To help plan its risk mitigation efforts, the Coast Guard has
Region                            established strategic commitments for maintaining a presence in the
                                  Arctic region (including and beyond the U.S. Arctic region) using its
                                  various assets, including its personnel, cutters, and aircraft. To help meet
                                  these commitments and better manage its operations, given the region’s
                                  vast geographic area and often harsh weather conditions, the Coast
                                  Guard forward deploys assets to key locations in the U.S. Arctic region.
                                  See figure 3 for a depiction of the long air and sea distances required to
                                  reach the north Alaska coastline. These assets are forward deployed to
                                  the Arctic from other locations—such as California, Hawaii, Washington,
                                  and elsewhere in Alaska—reducing transit times for carrying out its
                                  missions in the summer and fall when maritime activity peaks in the
                                  region. According to Coast Guard officials, this annual effort—known as
                                  Operation Arctic Shield—allows the Coast Guard to allocate resources,
                                  support communities in the Arctic, conduct missions, and identify areas
                                  where the Coast Guard needs support from partners. 26 The Coast Guard
                                  also forward deploys Maritime Safety and Security Teams to support
                                  Operation Arctic Shield. 27




                                  26Operation Arctic Shield is intended to provide the Coast Guard with the opportunity to
                                  conduct its missions and activities, broaden partnerships in support of its Arctic
                                  operations, and enhance and improve its preparedness, prevention, and response
                                  capabilities in the Arctic. See GAO, Arctic Capabilities: Coast Guard is Taking Steps to
                                  Address Key Challenges, but Additional Work Remains, GAO-20-374t (Washington, D.C.:
                                  Feb. 5, 2020).
                                  27The Coast Guard Maritime Safety and Security Teams are maritime security
                                  antiterrorism forces that are managed as national deployable units responsible for
                                  safeguarding the public and protecting vessels, harbors, ports, facilities, and cargo in U.S.
                                  territorial waters. The teams are one component of the Coast Guard’s Deployable
                                  Specialized Forces, which deploy from their home locations, such as major U.S. port
                                  areas, to conduct operations in U.S. coastal waters and internationally. For more
                                  information, see GAO, Coast Guard: Assessing Deployable Specialized Forces’
                                  Workforce Needs Could Improve Efficiency and Reduce Potential Overlap or Gaps in
                                  Capabilities, GAO-20-33 (Washington, D.C.: Nov. 21, 2019).




                                  Page 11                                                         GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
Figure 3: Air and Sea Travel Distances in Alaska




                                         The Coast Guard also manages operational risk by participating in
                                         exercises in the U.S. Arctic with DOD, other federal agencies, and
                                         international partners. For example, according to Coast Guard officials,
                                         the Coast Guard provides standby search and rescue support for
                                         Operation Arctic Edge, DOD’s joint biennial exercise with the Canadian
                                         Armed Forces. The Coast Guard also helps plan for and participates in
                                         the Alaska National Guard’s recurring Arctic Eagle-Patriot exercise to
                                         train for homeland security and emergency response missions in and
                                         around the Arctic.

                                         The Coast Guard, DOD, and international partners also conduct
                                         exercises outside the U.S. Arctic. For example, Exercise Argus is an
                                         annual international training event for Arctic search and rescue and



                                         Page 12                                            GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
                               marine environmental incidents. In 2023, this training exercise included
                               Greenland, Denmark, and France. Another training exercise, Operation
                               Nanook, is an annual Canadian Armed Forces Arctic exercise with
                               international partners, including the U.S. Navy and Coast Guard.

Limited Asset Availability     The Coast Guard has multiple strategic commitments for operations in the
Hinders Efforts to Meet U.S.   U.S. Arctic region but has been unable to meet all of them in recent years
Arctic Region Strategic        for a variety of reasons. For example, the Coast Guard has maintained a
Commitments                    strategic commitment to have a 365-day major cutter presence in U.S.
                               Arctic waters, specifically the Bering Sea, but it has not always been able
                               to meet this commitment recently due to asset availability challenges.
                               Specifically, in fiscal year (FY) 2022, mechanical problems prevented the
                               Coast Guard from deploying a major cutter to the Bering Sea as planned,
                               resulting in a 27-day coverage gap.

                               The Coast Guard has a separate strategic commitment to provide a
                               seasonal major cutter presence in U.S. Arctic waters north of the Bering
                               Strait, 28 which the Coast Guard was also unable to meet in FY 2016 and
                               from FY 2019 through FY 2023. 29 See figure 4 below for Coast Guard
                               cutter deployment days in the U.S. Arctic region. Coast Guard officials
                               told us that the agency was unable to meet its strategic commitments in
                               the U.S. Arctic region at various times because of the COVID-19
                               pandemic, mechanical problems, and a lack of reserve major cutters.
                               Separately, Coast Guard documents identified competing demands for
                               major cutters in other areas, such as the Indo-Pacific region. In addition,
                               Coast Guard officials told us that environmental factors such as the
                               presence of sea ice can limit the ability of major cutters to access areas
                               north of the Bering Strait, which may result in reduced deployment days in
                               the region.

                               The Coast Guard polar icebreaker Healy has also been deployed to,
                               among other missions, help manage risks in the Arctic by providing a
                               seasonal Coast Guard presence in the region (see fig. 4). 30 However, this
                               ship’s ability to carry out its planned deployments has varied. For

                               28The Bering Strait, within the Bering Sea, is located between Alaska and Russia and is a
                               key convergence point for trans-Arctic routes that connect the Northwest Passage and the
                               Northern Sea Route to the Pacific Ocean.
                               29In FY 2016, the Coast Guard deployed a cutter to this region for 86 days, just missing its
                               strategic commitment of 90 days.
                               30The Healy primarily supports the research efforts of several federal agencies in the
                               Arctic but can also carry out Coast Guard missions, such as search and rescue.




                               Page 13                                                        GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
                                        instance, in FY 2019, the Healy helped to manage risk north of the Bering
                                        Strait by deploying to the U.S. Arctic region for 124 days, according to
                                        Coast Guard planning documents. However, its FY 2020 deployment was
                                        shortened from a planned 105 days to 26 days due to a propulsion motor
                                        fire. As a result, the Coast Guard deployed its other polar icebreaker, the
                                        Polar Star, to the U.S Arctic region for 78 days between December 2020
                                        and February 2021. 31

Figure 4: Coast Guard Strategic Commitments and Cutter Deployment Days to the U.S. Arctic Region, fiscal years 2016–2023




                                        Notes: Days deployed exceeds 365 days in some fiscal years because multiple cutters were
                                        deployed to the region and their combined days deployed are cumulative. “No data” means that the
                                        Coast Guard was unable to provide information on the number of days its cutters or icebreaker were
                                        deployed during that fiscal year. “North of the Bering Strait” refers to the Chukchi, Barents, and
                                        Beaufort Seas. Strategic commitments are resource allocations that Coast Guard deems critical to
                                        the implementation of national, Department of Homeland Security, and Coast Guard strategic
                                        priorities. The Coast Guard did not establish a strategic commitment for Arctic icebreaker
                                        deployments until fiscal year 2019. Pacific Area is one of two Coast Guard commands, and its

                                        31Coast Guard officials stated that the agency was able to deploy the Polar Star to the
                                        Arctic to cover for the Healy because the Polar Star’s annual Antarctic mission for FY
                                        2020 was canceled due to the COVID-19 pandemic.




                                        Page 14                                                             GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
geographic area of responsibility ranges from the U.S. western states to Asia and from the Arctic to
Antarctica.
a
 The polar icebreaker Healy deploys annually to the Arctic region in support of national objectives and
research efforts for several federal agencies. The Healy’s fiscal year 2020 deployment was shortened
from a planned 105 days to 26 days due to a motor fire. The Coast Guard’s other polar icebreaker,
Polar Star, typically conducts annual Antarctic missions. It was deployed to the Arctic for 78 days in
fiscal year 2021 when its Antarctic mission was canceled. This deployment is not included in the
figure above.


Coast Guard officials noted that the agency’s operational challenges in
the U.S. Arctic region are amplified by limited infrastructure and logistics
capabilities in Alaska. In addition to major cutters and icebreakers, the
Coast Guard also forward deploys helicopters to the U.S. Arctic region as
part of Operation Arctic Shield. The Coast Guard operates these
helicopters from a leased Alaska National Guard aircraft hangar in
Kotzebue, Alaska, because it lacks such infrastructure in the Arctic
region. Coast Guard officials also told us that it can take weeks to
transport large spare parts, such as helicopter rotor blades, to their
destinations in the region because they must be shipped by barge over
long distances. These logistical challenges can further limit Coast Guard
assets’ availability to conduct missions.

To address operational challenges in this and other regions, the Coast
Guard plans to acquire 28 new cutters, 32 including at least three new
icebreakers. 33 However, in the interim, the Coast Guard has projected it
will have a reduced number of ships available for operations through FY




32GAO has an ongoing review about the planned new Polar Security Cutters. GAO
expects to issue a report on the results of its review in fall 2024.
33In addition to these three new icebreakers, the James M. Inhofe National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023 includes a provision that authorized $150 million for
the acquisition or procurement of a United States built available icebreaker. See Pub. L.
No. 117-263, div. K, tit. CXI, § 11104(a)(5), tit. CXII, subtit. C, § 11223(a), 136 Stat. at
4004, 4021. The Further Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2024 includes a provision
appropriating over $1.41 billion for necessary expenses of the Coast Guard for
procurement, construction, and improvements, including vessels and aircraft. See Pub. L.
No. 118-47, div. C, tit II, 138 Stat. 460, 600. The joint explanatory statement for the act
includes a provision specifying that $125 million is provided for procurement of a
commercially available polar icebreaker. See Staff of H.R. Comm. on App., 118th Cong.,
Joint Explanatory Statement for Division C—Department of Homeland Security
Appropriations Act 31 (Comm. Print 2024).




Page 15                                                                GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
                               2039. 34 Until these new ships enter service, cutter and icebreaker
                               shortages may continue to challenge the Coast Guard’s ability to meet its
                               strategic commitments in the U.S. Arctic region and other regions.

Key District 17 Resource and   Key Coast Guard operational performance reports for FY 2016 through
Performance Information is     FY 2021 that identify resource hour use and mission performance
Incomplete or Missing          information for District 17 were partially complete or incomplete. 35 Further,
                               Coast Guard officials said they could not locate District 17’s performance
                               report for FY 2022 and were not able to create one for FY 2023. See
                               table 2 below. Coast Guard guidance requires field units to complete
                               these reports, which are used as part of its annual planning process. This
                               process is the Coast Guard’s primary mechanism for allocating resources
                               and providing strategic direction to operational commanders.

                               Coast Guard documentation for FY 2016 through FY 2020 had complete
                               information on resource hour use by mission. However, the
                               documentation had either incomplete or partially complete information on
                               mission performance for these years. 36 For example, these reports did not
                               consistently include mission performance targets for key District 17
                               missions, such as maritime law enforcement. 37

                               District 17 performance reports also identified data system limitations that
                               may have affected the accuracy of resource hour use and mission

                               34Both the Offshore Patrol Cutter and the Polar Security Cutter acquisitions programs
                               have been delayed. For more information, see GAO, Coast Guard Acquisitions: Offshore
                               Patrol Cutter Program Needs to Mature Technology and Design [Reissued with revisions
                               on Aug. 1, 2023], GAO-23-105805 (Washington, D.C.: June 20, 2023) and GAO, Coast
                               Guard Acquisitions: Polar Security Cutter Needs to Stabilize Design Before Starting
                               Construction and Improve Schedule Oversight, GAO-23-105949 (Washington, D.C.: July
                               27, 2023).
                               35Resource hour use is the amount of time that Coast Guard aircraft, cutters, and small
                               boats spent conducting missions and exercises during the fiscal year. Mission
                               performance information is quantitative targets and results for different Coast Guard
                               missions.
                               36When we evaluated the reports, “complete” meant that elements of the performance
                               reports contained complete resource hour or mission performance data for all missions
                               executed in District 17. “Partially complete” meant that elements of the performance
                               reports contained data for some missions but not others. “Incomplete” meant that
                               elements of the performance reports lacked data for all missions. “Unavailable” meant that
                               we could not evaluate performance reports because Coast Guard could not provide those
                               reports.
                               37Quantitative targets for Coast Guard’s maritime law enforcement missions include, for
                               example, the interdiction rate of foreign fishing vessels violating U.S. waters, and the
                               percent of federal fisheries found to be in compliance with laws and regulations.




                               Page 16                                                          GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
performance data. For instance, the reports described data system
malfunctions and miscategorized multimission cutter patrol hours. These
reports stated that District 17 officials were working to correct erroneous
records. 38

Table 2: Completeness of Coast Guard District 17 Performance Report Elements

Fiscal Year                      Resource Hour Use              Mission Performance Targets
2016                             Complete                       Incomplete
2017                             Complete                       Partially Complete
2018                             Complete                       Partially Complete
2019                             Complete                       Partially Complete
2020                             Complete                       Partially Complete
2021                             Incomplete                     Incomplete
2022                             Unavailable                    Unavailable
2023                             Unavailable                    Unavailable
Source: GAO analysis of Coast Guard data | GAO-24-106491

Note: Coast Guard District 17 is responsible for over 3.85 million square miles of territory throughout
Alaska and the U.S. Arctic region, including over 47,300 miles of shoreline. Resource hour use refers
to the amount of time that Coast Guard aircraft, ships, and small boats spent conducting missions
and exercises. Mission performance targets refer to Coast Guard’s quantitative goals for its various
missions. “Complete” means that elements of the performance reports contained complete resource
hour or mission performance data for all missions executed in District 17. “Partially Complete” means
that elements of the performance reports contained data for some missions but not others.
“Incomplete” means that elements of the performance reports lacked data for all missions.
“Unavailable” indicates that we could not evaluate performance reports because Coast Guard could
not provide those reports. According to Coast Guard officials, District 17’s fiscal year 2022
performance report was lost during a data migration. Additionally, District 17 stated it could not
produce a performance report for fiscal year 2023 due to a shortage of qualified personnel.




38We previously reviewed a key Coast Guard data system that it uses to track and report
results for nearly all of its missions and identified several data issues in Coast Guard
records including data errors, incomplete or missing records, and inconsistent data entry
practices. We made four recommendations to the Coast Guard, including a
recommendation to assess and address the causes of data errors and inconsistent data
entry. In January 2021, Coast Guard told us that it completed its review of data errors and
planned to carry out a project to merge duplicate records. Coast Guard said that that it
would reassess data errors and inconsistent entries after completing this project. In June
2023, Coast Guard officials stated that they expected to complete this project in fiscal year
2024. We continue to monitor actions the Coast Guard takes to fully implement all four of
our recommendations. GAO, Coast Guard: Actions Needed to Ensure Investments in Key
Data System Meet Mission and Used Needs, GAO-20-562 (Washington, D.C.: July 16,
2020).




Page 17                                                                GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
Coast Guard guidance specifies area and district responsibilities. 39
Specifically, Coast Guard guidance states that district commanders are
responsible for consolidating, developing, and submitting required
performance report products. 40 Other Coast Guard guidance further
states that reliable performance measures provide baselines and
benchmarks for assessing progress toward achieving mission purposes
and program objectives. 41

The Coast Guard informed us that there were several reasons for why
District 17 performance reports were unavailable or incomplete.
Specifically, Coast Guard officials stated that District 17’s FY 2022 report
was lost during a data migration, and that District 17 was unable to
produce a performance report for FY 2023 due to a shortage of qualified
personnel. They further stated that personnel shortages also contributed
to the incomplete and partially complete performance reports in earlier
fiscal years. Coast Guard headquarters officials also said that preparing
performance reports is a collateral duty and that personnel routinely
rotate positions across the Coast Guard making the tracking of
performance information more difficult. These factors may have
contributed to the deficiencies in District 17’s performance reports. Coast
Guard officials from District 17 told us in April 2024 that they filled vacant
District 17 positions in August 2023 to carry out the performance report
oversight process and prevent future issues. 42

The Coast Guard’s performance reports are a key input in its operational
planning process because they enable the agency to quantitatively
assess its mission performance, identify capability gaps, and forecast
future operational requirements. Filling vacant positions in District 17 may
help address the reasons that performance reports were unavailable or
incomplete. However, these issues were present for multiple years from

39United States Coast Guard, Commandant Instruction 3120.4B: Coast Guard Standard
Operational Planning Process/Global Force Management. This document was developed
in response to GAO recommendations. See GAO, Coast Guard: Actions Needed to
Improve Strategic Allocation of Assets and Determine Workforce Requirements,
GAO-16-379 (Washington, D.C.: May 24, 2016). This instruction replaced Commandant
Instruction 3120.4A, which was originally published in December 2009.
40United States Coast Guard, Global Force Management (GFM) 2.0 Process Guide.

41United States Coast Guard, Deputy Commandant for Operations, Framework for
Strategic Mission Management, Enterprise Risk Stewardship, and Internal Control.
42We have previously testified on Coast Guard recruitment and retention challenges. See
GAO, Coast Guard: Recruitment and Retention Challenges Persist, GAO-23-106750
(Washington, D.C.: May 11, 2023).




Page 18                                                     GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
                              FY 2016 through FY 2023, even though the performance reports indicate
                              that the same staff member was completing the documents for at least 3
                              of these years. Collecting and reporting complete information from District
                              17 about resource use and mission performance in accordance with
                              Coast Guard guidance would better position the agency to monitor its
                              activity and make more informed operational planning decisions for the
                              Arctic region.

Coast Guard Has               The Coast Guard’s Arctic implementation plan outlines initiatives and
Developed an Arctic           actions intended to execute Coast Guard strategic objectives and to
                              support national Arctic efforts. These actions include efforts to manage
Implementation Plan, but It
                              and mitigate risks, such as risks from climate change and increased
Does Not Include Key          maritime activity. Coast Guard officials stated that they have examined
Metrics                       the national Arctic strategy and the Coast Guard Arctic strategy to ensure
                              alignment between both strategies and the Coast Guard implementation
                              plan. 43 Coast Guard officials also noted that full execution of the plan is
                              contingent upon additional Coast Guard and whole-of-government
                              investments in technologies, capabilities, resources, and personnel.

                              While the Coast Guard Arctic implementation plan includes numerous
                              action items, the items generally do not include key metrics. Specifically,
                              of the 97 action items, none have associated quantitative performance
                              measures and targets. 44 Three have time frame descriptions, two have
                              partial time frame descriptions, and the remaining 92 do not have time
                              frame descriptions (see fig. 5 below). 45 Other action items refer to time
                              frames for part of an action item, but not for all of it. For example, one

                              43The Executive Director of the Arctic Executive Steering Committee separately noted that
                              the national Arctic implementation plan and the Coast Guard Arctic implementation plan
                              were aligned because they were developed at the same time. Coast Guard officials stated
                              that they have completed a document mapping the national Arctic strategy to the Coast
                              Guard Arctic strategy. The Coast Guard provided documentation showing high-level
                              alignment between the national Arctic strategy objectives and the Coast Guard Arctic
                              strategy initiatives.
                              44For example, one initiative describes the Coast Guard’s involvement in joint Arctic
                              operations and exercises along with planned action items to develop and implement a
                              unified Pacific Area and Atlantic Area campaign plan to increase operations, coordination,
                              and exercises across the region. However, the initiative does not include metrics for doing
                              so.
                              45For example, some action items included partial time frames, such as conducting
                              bilateral/regional exercises and annual communication drills as necessary. Coast Guard
                              officials stated that some action items do not include time frames because they are
                              ongoing actions. For example, one action item describes enhancing Coast Guard
                              engagement with federally recognized Tribes and Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act
                              corporations to build relationships and gain knowledge.




                              Page 19                                                        GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
action item describes coordinating with DHS and the U.S. Department of
State to: 1) implement, strengthen, exercise, and update Arctic-Specific
Joint Contingency Plans and Arctic Letters of Intent, 2) conduct
bilateral/regional exercises, and 3) conduct annual communication drills.
In this case, only annual communication drills included a time frame.

Figure 5: Analysis of Coast Guard Arctic Implementation Plan Action Items




a
 Initiatives describe how the Coast Guard intends to accomplish its strategic objectives in the Coast
Guard Arctic strategy.
b
 Action items describe what the Coast Guard considers to be critical next steps to advance efforts in
the Coast Guard Arctic strategy.
c
  Performance measures and targets provide baselines and benchmarks for assessing progress
toward objectives. “None” means that an action item did not include performance measures or
targets.
d
 Time frame descriptions identify when actions will be taken. “Full” means that an action item included
time frames. “Partial” means that an action item included some mention of time frames, such as for
one element of the item, but not for all elements. “None” means that there was no mention of time
frames.


The Coast Guard’s Framework for Strategic Mission Management,
Enterprise Risk Stewardship, and Internal Control states that an
appropriate metric system makes setting performance standards and
gauging progress toward achievement possible. 46 It draws from federal




46United States Coast Guard, Deputy Commandant for Operations, Framework for
Strategic Mission Management, Enterprise Risk Stewardship, and Internal Control.




Page 20                                                                GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
guidance and international standards. 47 It also describes development of
strategic initiatives and states that a thorough scoping of implementation
requirements is important. This guidance further states this should include
identifying major steps and tasks, corresponding schedules, timelines,
and critical paths as well as developing suitable measures, controls,
targets, milestones, and feedback mechanisms. Past GAO work has also
highlighted the use of milestones as a way to assess performance and
progress, especially when using quantitative assessments is not
feasible. 48

Coast Guard officials stated that the agency plans to coordinate with the
Arctic Executive Steering Committee to ensure alignment between the
Coast Guard Arctic implementation plan and the national Arctic
implementation plan while measuring and reporting progress. 49 According
to these officials, the Coast Guard’s new Polar Coordination Office will be
responsible for carrying out these efforts. 50 Coast Guard officials also
stated that they wrote the Coast Guard Arctic implementation plan as a
general planning document. Specifically, the plan articulates action items
to advance the Coast Guard and national Arctic strategies. These officials
also said that they intend to conduct annual internal assessments that will
inform Coast Guard leadership about what the Coast Guard was and was
not able to accomplish. The assessments will then form the basis for
future resource proposals. The officials added that once they obtain




47The framework states that it incorporates best practices and the latest direction drawn
from federal guidance and the international standards from which the federal guidelines
are established, including GAO’s Standards for Internal Control in the Federal
Government, and the Office of Management and Budget Circular No. A-11 and No. A-123,
among others.
48GAO, Managing For Results: Agencies Should More Fully Develop Priority Goals under
the GPRA Modernization Act, GAO-13-174 (Washington, D.C.: Apr. 19, 2013).
49Regarding agency plan alignment with the national Arctic implementation plan, the
Executive Director of the Arctic Executive Steering Committee stated that the committee
does not approve federal agencies’ Arctic strategies or implementation plans. However, if
the committee noticed a significant issue with one, it would raise the issue with the
relevant agency.
50The Coast Guard Arctic implementation plan includes action items under Initiative 14:
Formalize the U.S. Coast Guard Polar Enterprise, which states that the Coast Guard will
“develop a framework to inform U.S. Coast Guard leadership on progress in advancing the
2019 Arctic Strategic Outlook and this Implementation Plan” as well as “conduct annual
assessments of the initiatives and brief U.S. Coast Guard leadership on future goals.”




Page 21                                                        GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
                         dedicated funding for applicable action items, they would be able to
                         identify completion dates and performance measures. 51

                         The Coast Guard Arctic implementation plan is intended to outline
                         planned actions to execute its strategic objectives and support national
                         Arctic efforts. However, if its action items do not include an appropriate
                         metric system, such as performance measures, targets, and time frames,
                         it will be difficult for the Coast Guard to effectively align its activities in the
                         region with its strategic objectives. This includes determining its resource
                         needs for both the near and long term, assessing its progress toward
                         achieving Coast Guard strategic objectives, and ensuring that its efforts
                         are aligned with the national Arctic implementation plan.

                         Coast Guard officials stated that they intend to track their efforts through
                         annual internal assessments, which they would use to inform Coast
                         Guard leadership of what they were and were not able to accomplish.
                         However, this approach does not provide a high-level roadmap that could
                         help the Coast Guard more effectively plan for its near- and longer-term
                         Arctic priorities, determine the type and timing of its Arctic-related
                         resource needs, and help ensure that the Coast Guard is both making
                         progress toward achieving its strategic objectives and remaining aligned
                         with the national Arctic efforts.

                         Coast Guard and DOD documents and officials described collaborating in
Coast Guard and the      several ways to assess and manage risks in the Arctic region. For
Department of            example, the Coast Guard and DOD have an interagency agreement that
                         specifies how the two agencies will collaborate to address marine salvage
Defense Collaborate      and pollution incidents, such as oil spills. Officials described having a
on Arctic Issues in      generally collaborative working relationship where they share relevant
                         information and expertise, provide operational and exercise assistance,
Various Ways             and coordinate on joint projects.

Shared Information and   Arctic strategy input. Both Coast Guard and DOD officials stated that
Expertise                they collaborated on the development of their Arctic strategies. DOD

                         51In 2016, we recommended that the Coast Guard develop measures for gauging how its
                         actions helped to mitigate Arctic capability gaps and to design and implement a process to
                         systematically assess the extent to which actions taken agency-wide have helped mitigate
                         the gaps for which it has responsibility. Although DHS agreed with our two
                         recommendations, to date, the Coast Guard has not addressed them. To fully address
                         these recommendations, the Coast Guard will need to finalize the development of
                         measures that would enable it to gauge how its actions have helped to mitigate Arctic
                         capability gaps and then use these measures to assess how its actions have helped to
                         mitigate Arctic capability gaps. See GAO-16-453.




                         Page 22                                                       GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
officials told us that the Coast Guard was part of a collaborative working
group that helped DOD develop its 2019 Arctic strategy. 52 According to
DOD officials, the Navy, Air Force, and Coast Guard formed a
collaborative working group to facilitate development of each of their most
recent Arctic strategies, which were issued between 2019 and 2021. The
Coast Guard also provided input into the development of the Army’s
Arctic strategy. 53

Risk information sharing. Coast Guard officials stated that they
regularly evaluate Arctic risks and work with federal, state, and local
partners to conduct risk assessments, although not all of these
assessments result in formal reports. For example, officials stated that
District 17 conducts daily and seasonal risk assessments, and the
intelligence community, which includes Coast Guard and DOD entities,
completes detailed threat assessments. A Coast Guard liaison officer with
the Navy stated that risk assessment collaboration between the Coast
Guard and DOD occurs more commonly at the operational and tactical
levels, and for the Coast Guard it is carried out by districts and sectors.

Arctic domain awareness. According to the national Arctic
implementation plan, DHS, through the Coast Guard, will collaborate with
DOD to improve domain awareness in the Arctic. 54 Specifically, DOD is to
lead efforts to modernize systems that detect and track potential airborne
and maritime threats, and the Coast Guard is to support DOD’s efforts.
The Coast Guard is to provide effective maritime security, law




52In August 2023, DOD officials told us that they are reviewing and developing an update
to this Arctic strategy. According to the officials, the Coast Guard received a draft of the
updated DOD Arctic strategy and had an opportunity to provide informal input. Department
of Defense, Report to Congress Department of Defense Arctic Strategy, (Washington,
D.C.: June 2019).
53United States Coast Guard, Arctic Strategic Outlook. Department of the Air Force, The
Department of the Air Force Arctic Strategy (Washington, D.C.: July 21, 2020).
Department of the Army, Regaining Arctic Dominance: The U.S. Army in the Arctic
(Washington, D.C: Jan. 19, 2021). Department of the Navy, a Blue Arctic: A Strategic
Blueprint for the Arctic (Washington, D.C.: Jan. 5, 2021).
54Elements of domain awareness include maritime and air, among others. According to
Coast Guard, maritime domain awareness is the effective understanding of anything
associated with the maritime domain that could impact the security, safety, economy, or
environment of the United States. According to DHS, air domain awareness is the
understanding of everything in the air, including the detection, tracking, and identification
of manned and unmanned aircraft.




Page 23                                                          GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
enforcement, search and rescue, and emergency response. 55 According
to the national Arctic implementation plan, Coast Guard efforts are to
include expanding its icebreaker fleet to support increased presence in
the Arctic, and DOD is to support these efforts.

One way that the Coast Guard and DOD have collaborated on domain
awareness in the Arctic region is through the U.S. National Ice Center.
This multiagency organization is composed of officials from the Coast
Guard, Navy, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
and provides sea ice forecasts and other environmental intelligence
products to government agencies. According to U.S. National Ice Center
officials, these products can be tailored to meet the mission needs of
federal agencies. For instance, when the Coast Guard polar icebreaker
Healy conducts operations in the Arctic region, the ship’s commander
obtains information about sea ice conditions from the National Ice Center.

Another domain awareness collaboration between Coast Guard and DOD
involves their efforts to monitor foreign naval exercises that are regularly
conducted in the Arctic region. 56 To ensure that communications are
maintained between Coast Guard and DOD, Coast Guard officials stated
that they meet quarterly with DOD officials and plan to change this to
monthly meetings in the future. 57




55To inform these missions, Coast Guard contracts with the Marine Exchange of Alaska,
which enables the Coast Guard to access the Marine Exchange of Alaska’s data showing
the location of vessels along with other vessel status information that enables the Coast
Guard to better monitor vessels in the region.
56In addition, the James M. Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
2023 directed the Commandant of the Coast Guard, in consultation with the Secretaries of
Defense and State as well as commercial fishing industry participants, to “develop and
publish on a publicly available website a plan for notifying United States mariners and the
operators of United States fishing vessels in advance of” (1) military exercises in the
exclusive economic zone, or (2) other military activities that will impact recreational or
commercial activities. See Pub. L. No. 117-263, div. K, tit. CXIII, subtit. D, § 11323, 136
Stat. at 4094 (codified at 14 U.S.C. § 504 note). The term exclusive economic zone refers
to an area up to 200 nautical miles from the territorial sea baseline where a country has
sovereign rights to natural resources such as fishing and energy production.
57Coast Guard officials said that there was an incident in 2020 where Russia conducted
an exercise within the U.S.’s exclusive economic zone in the Bering Sea and the Coast
Guard did not inform U.S. mariners operating in the region ahead of time. The Coast
Guard stated that this was not a result of failed communication between Coast Guard and
DOD officials. After the incident, communication between Coast Guard and DOD
improved, and they began meeting quarterly.




Page 24                                                        GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
                           Shared strategic expertise. According to the national Arctic strategy, the
                           Ted Stevens Center for Arctic Security Studies (Stevens Center) is an
                           institution that will advance expertise and cooperation in the Arctic. 58
                           According to the Stevens Center, it was established in 2021 to promote
                           integrated, collaborative responses to transnational threats; foster
                           common perspectives on regional security challenges; and strengthen
                           binational and multinational institutional relationships. Stevens Center
                           officials we interviewed in July 2023 stated that the center has worked to
                           build in Coast Guard requirements and requests into its roadmap of
                           programmatic and planning decisions. However, at that time the center
                           had not yet reached its full operating capacity and was still developing its
                           programs.

Operational and Exercise   Operational support. The Coast Guard and DOD assist each other by
Assistance                 leveraging their specialized expertise and unique operational capabilities.
                           According to District 17 officials, the Coast Guard assists DOD with
                           transportation, can assist Navy ships if needed, and shares its subject
                           matter expertise about Arctic operations with DOD. DOD has assisted the
                           Coast Guard by, for example, providing parachute-trained medics to help
                           deliver medical care to people in the Aleutian Islands.

                           Search and rescue coordination. Both Coast Guard and DOD play
                           unique roles in the federal government’s plan for coordinating domestic
                           and international search and rescue operations. The National Search and
                           Rescue Plan of the United States describes the roles and responsibilities
                           of Coast Guard and DOD, as well as other agencies, in different search
                           and rescue situations. 59 According to this plan, the Coast Guard has
                           overall responsibility for coordinating, establishing, and providing maritime
                           search and rescue services. For example, Coast Guard officials told us
                           that they provide search and rescue coverage during Operation Arctic
                           Edge, a biennial exercise DOD conducts with the Canadian Armed
                           Forces. Additionally, the plan states that DOD can provide unique search




                           58The Stevens Center is one of DOD’s Regional Centers for Security Studies and is
                           located in Anchorage, Alaska. These centers are operated by DOD as international
                           venues for bilateral and multilateral research, communication, exchange of ideas, and
                           training involving military and civilian participants. See generally Floyd D. Spence National
                           Defense Authorization for Fiscal Year 2001, Pub. L. No. 106-398, tit. IX, subtit. B, § 912,
                           114 Stat. 1654, 1654A-228-30 (codified as amended at 10 U.S.C. § 342).
                           59National Search and Rescue Committee, National Search and Rescue Plan of the
                           United States, (Washington, D.C.: 2016).




                           Page 25                                                         GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
                       and rescue capabilities, specialized expertise, and facilities to support a
                       wide variety of search and rescue operations.

                       Oil spill response. The Coast Guard and Navy have an interagency
                       agreement that facilitates their collaboration on marine salvage and
                       pollution incidents, including oil spill response. According to DOD officials,
                       the U.S. Navy Supervisor of Salvage and Diving maintains equipment in
                       Alaska that is made available to the Coast Guard when needed to
                       respond to an oil spill or to conduct exercises. The Coast Guard and Navy
                       also collaborate, along with other federal, state, and local partners, and
                       industry, to conduct oil spill response exercises in Alaska. 60

Project Coordination   Polar Security Cutter acquisition program. The Coast Guard and the
                       Navy are jointly managing the Coast Guard’s Polar Security Cutter
                       acquisition program. As we reported in July 2023, the Coast Guard plans
                       to invest at least $11.6 billion for the acquisition, operations, and
                       maintenance of these cutters. 61 Navy officials provide acquisition,
                       contracting, engineering and design, cost-estimating, and executive
                       support to the program.

                       The Coast Guard has a key role in Arctic policy implementation and
Conclusions            enforcement and faces growing responsibilities to assess and manage
                       risks to maritime safety and security, national security, and the maritime
                       environment as regional conditions continue to change. The Coast Guard
                       has taken actions to manage these risks by deploying cutters and aircraft
                       into the U.S. Arctic region during peak maritime activity. It has also
                       initiated plans to acquire new major cutters and polar icebreakers to
                       enhance its capabilities in the region.

                       However, the new assets will not be available for years and major cutter
                       deployments north of the Bering Strait have been limited in recent
                       years—an indicator of the resource constraints that affect the Coast
                       Guard’s ability to meet its strategic commitments in the U.S. Arctic region.
                       In addition, most District 17 performance reports—essential to the Coast
                       Guard’s strategic planning process—are not complete, which affects the

                       60Coast Guard and Navy have a 2015 memorandum of agreement regarding interservice
                       cooperation in oil spill response and salvage operations. The agreement outlines
                       procedures for requesting each other’s assistance, reimbursing associated costs, and
                       specific responsibilities.
                       61For more information on the Polar Security Cutter program, see GAO, Coast Guard
                       Acquisitions: Polar Security Cutter Needs to Stabilize Design Before Starting Construction
                       and Improve Schedule Oversight, GAO-23-105949 (Washington, D.C.: July 27, 2023).




                       Page 26                                                       GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
                      Coast Guard’s ability to allocate resources and provide direction to
                      operational commanders. Ensuring that District 17 collects and reports
                      complete information would enable the Coast Guard to better monitor its
                      resource use and mission performance in the U.S. Arctic. This, in turn,
                      would enable better operational planning decisions and more accurate
                      assessments of the Coast Guard’s future resource needs to meet its
                      strategic commitments.

                      The Coast Guard’s Arctic implementation plan also has limitations that
                      can affect the Coast Guard’s ability to plan for its strategic objectives in
                      the Arctic region, carry them out, and support national Arctic efforts.
                      Coast Guard officials stated that its Arctic implementation plan is not
                      where they intend to track progress on Arctic efforts. Instead, they intend
                      to track their efforts through annual internal assessments, which they
                      would use to inform Coast Guard leadership of what they were and were
                      not able to accomplish, and to support future resource proposals. Annual
                      assessments and reporting on results have value. However, this
                      approach does not provide a high-level roadmap with performance
                      measures, targets, and time frames that could help the Coast Guard more
                      effectively plan for its near- and longer-term Arctic priorities, determine
                      the type and timing of its Arctic-related resource needs, and help ensure
                      that the Coast Guard is both making progress toward achieving its
                      strategic objectives and remaining aligned with the national Arctic efforts.

                      We are making two recommendations to the Coast Guard:
Recommendations for
Executive Action      The Commandant of the Coast Guard should ensure that District 17
                      collects and reports complete information about resource use and mission
                      performance in accordance with Coast Guard guidance.
                      (Recommendation 1)

                      The Commandant of the Coast Guard should ensure that the Coast
                      Guard’s Arctic implementation plan includes performance measures with
                      associated targets and time frames for the action items described in the
                      plan in accordance with Coast Guard guidance. (Recommendation 2)

                      We provided a draft of this report to DHS, DOD, NOAA, and the AESC for
Agency Comments       review and comment. DOD, NOAA, and the AESC did not have
and Our Evaluation    comments on the report. DHS concurred with our recommendations, and
                      its response is reproduced in appendix I.

                      In response to our first recommendation that the Coast Guard ensure that
                      District 17 collects and reports complete information about resource use


                      Page 27                                             GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
and mission performance in accordance with Coast Guard guidance,
DHS stated that District 17 has integrated the practice of reviewing
Operational Assessment Report statuses and deadlines during bi-weekly
leadership meetings to ensure cross-department visibility and
collaboration. DHS’s response further stated that guidance contained in
the Operation Planning Direction will be condensed and distributed to
subordinate operational units on a quarterly basis. According to DHS, this
will better enable the collection and reporting of complete information
about resource use and mission performance in accordance with Coast
Guard guidance.

In response to our second recommendation that the Coast Guard ensure
its Arctic implementation plan includes performance measures with
associated targets and time frames for action items described in the plan,
DHS stated that the Coast Guard’s Polar Coordination Office will
coordinate action to address this recommendation by incorporating
milestones into the program and project execution plans associated with
action items described in its Arctic implementation plan as they are
developed. DHS also stated that the Polar Coordination Office will
capture the advancement of Arctic strategic objectives, which will be
tracked and shared with Coast Guard leadership, as appropriate. We
maintain that including performance measures with associated targets
and time frames for its Arctic implementation plan action items could help
the Coast Guard coordinate its Arctic efforts more effectively and better
inform related resource requests.

DHS also provided technical comments on our report, which we have
incorporated as appropriate.

We are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional
committees; the Departments of Homeland Security, Defense, and
Commerce; the Office of Science and Technology Policy; and other
interested parties. In addition, the report is available at no charge on the
GAO website at https://www.gao.gov.

If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact
me at (202) 512-8777 or macleodh@gao.gov. Contact points for our
Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on




Page 28                                              GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
the last page of this report. GAO staff who made key contributions to this
report are listed in appendix II.




Heather MacLeod, Director,
Homeland Security and Justice




Page 29                                             GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
Appendix I: Comments from the Department
             Appendix I: Comments from the Department of
             Homeland Security


of Homeland Security




             Page 30                                       GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
Appendix I: Comments from the Department of
Homeland Security




Page 31                                       GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
Appendix II: GAO Contact and Staff
                   Appendix II: GAO Contact and Staff
                   Acknowledgments


Acknowledgments

                   Heather MacLeod, (202) 512-8777 or macleodh@gao.gov
GAO Contact
                   In addition to the contact named above, Dawn Hoff (Assistant Director);
Staff              Steve Komadina (Analyst-in-Charge); Nasreen Badat; Pete Haderlein;
Acknowledgments:   Eric Hauswirth; Samantha Lyew; Amanda Miller; Janet Temko-Blinder;
                   and Haley Wall made key contributions to this report.




                   Page 32                                           GAO-24-106491 Coast Guard
                         The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation, and investigative
GAO’s Mission            arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional
                         responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the
                         federal government for the American people. GAO examines the use of public
                         funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses,
                         recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed
                         oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s commitment to good government
                         is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability.

                         The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is
Obtaining Copies of      through our website. Each weekday afternoon, GAO posts on its website newly
GAO Reports and          released reports, testimony, and correspondence. You can also subscribe to
                         GAO’s email updates to receive notification of newly posted products.
Testimony
Order by Phone           The price of each GAO publication reflects GAO’s actual cost of production and
                         distribution and depends on the number of pages in the publication and whether
                         the publication is printed in color or black and white. Pricing and ordering
                         information is posted on GAO’s website, https://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm.
                         Place orders by calling (202) 512-6000, toll free (866) 801-7077, or
                         TDD (202) 512-2537.
                         Orders may be paid for using American Express, Discover Card, MasterCard,
                         Visa, check, or money order. Call for additional information.

                         Connect with GAO on Facebook, Flickr, Twitter, and YouTube.
Connect with GAO         Subscribe to our RSS Feeds or Email Updates. Listen to our Podcasts.
                         Visit GAO on the web at https://www.gao.gov.

                         Contact FraudNet:
To Report Fraud,
                         Website: https://www.gao.gov/about/what-gao-does/fraudnet
Waste, and Abuse in
                         Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7700
Federal Programs
                         A. Nicole Clowers, Managing Director, ClowersA@gao.gov, (202) 512-4400, U.S.
Congressional            Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7125, Washington,
Relations                DC 20548

                         Sarah Kaczmarek, Acting Managing Director, KaczmarekS@gao.gov, (202) 512-
Public Affairs           4800, U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149
                         Washington, DC 20548

                         Stephen J. Sanford, Managing Director, spel@gao.gov, (202) 512-4707
Strategic Planning and   U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7814,
External Liaison         Washington, DC 20548
